The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility∗
Raj Chetty, Harvard University and NBER
John N. Friedman, Brown University and NBER
Nathaniel Hendren, Harvard University and NBER
Maggie R. Jones, U.S. Census Bureau
Sonya R. Porter, U.S. Census Bureau
January 2020
Abstract
We construct a public atlas of children’s outcomes in adulthood by the Census tract in which
they grew up using anonymized longitudinal data covering nearly the entire U.S. population.
For each tract, we estimate children’s earnings distributions, incarceration rates, and other outcomes in adulthood by parental income, race, and gender. Children’s outcomes vary sharply
across nearby areas: for children with parents at the 25th percentile of the national income
distribution, the standard deviation of mean household income at age 35 is $5,000 across tracts
within counties. We illustrate how the tract-level data provide insight into how neighborhoods
shape the development of human capital and support local economic policy using two applications. First, we show how these data can be used to better target policies to improve economic
opportunity by uncovering specific neighborhoods where certain subgroups of children grow up
to have poor outcomes. Neighborhoods matter at a very granular level: conditional on characteristics such as poverty rates in a child’s own Census tract, characteristics of tracts that
are one mile away have little predictive power for a child’s outcomes. Second, we show that
the observational estimates are highly predictive of neighborhoods’ causal effects, based on a
comparison to data from the Moving to Opportunity experiment and a quasi-experimental research design analyzing movers’ outcomes. We then identify high-opportunity neighborhoods
that are affordable to low-income families, information that can be used to design affordable
housing policies. Our measures of children’s long-term outcomes are only weakly correlated
with traditional proxies for local economic success such as rates of job growth, showing that the
conditions that create greater upward mobility are not necessarily the same as those that lead
to productive labor markets.
∗Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
The statistical summaries reported in this paper have been cleared by the Census Bureau’s Disclosure Review Board
release authorization number CBDRB-FY18-319. We thank John Abowd, Peter Bergman, David Deming, Edward
Glaeser, David Grusky, Lawrence Katz, Enrico Moretti, Robert Sampson, Salil Vadhan, and numerous seminar
participants for helpful comments and discussions. We are indebted to Caroline Dockes, Michael Droste, Benjamin
Goldman, Jack Hoyle, Federico Gonzalez Rodriguez, Jamie Gracie, Matthew Jacob, Martin Koenen, Sarah Merchant,
Donato Onorato, Kamelia Stavreva, Wilbur Townsend, Joseph Winkelmann, and other Opportunity Insights predoctoral fellows for their outstanding contributions to this work. This research was funded by the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Kellogg Foundation, Harvard
University, and the National Science Foundation.
I Introduction
Recent experimental and quasi-experimental studies have established that the neighborhood in
which a child grows up has substantial causal effects on his or her prospects of upward income
mobility (Chetty et al. 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018a; Chyn 2018; Deutscher 2018; Lalibert´e
2018; Nakamura et al. 2019).1 The emerging consensus that neighborhoods play a key role in
shaping children’s outcomes (Sharkey 2016) raises a natural question: which neighborhoods in the
United States currently offer the best and worst opportunities for children? Answering this question
can allow policy makers to target interventions to improve economic opportunity more effectively
and allow researchers to better understand the production function of opportunity.
There is currently no comprehensive data on children’s outcomes across neighborhoods in the
U.S., as prior work has focused either on a small subset of neighborhoods (e.g., the Moving to
Opportunity Experiment) or on coarse geographies such as commuting zones (e.g., Chetty et al.
2014). In this paper, we construct a new, publicly available dataset – which we term the Opportunity
Atlas – that provides estimates of the long-term outcomes of children who grew up in each Census
tract, which are small geographic units that have an average population of 4,250 people. Our
statistics differ from traditional indicators of local conditions based on cross-sectional data – such
as rates of poverty or crime – by tracing the roots of such outcomes back to the neighborhoods in
which children grew up (rather than where they live currently). We then use these new tract-level
data to shed light on how neighborhoods shape economic opportunity – e.g., by characterizing the
size of a “neighborhood” as it matters for social mobility – and inform the design of policies such
as housing vouchers for low-income families.
We construct the tract-level statistics using an individual-level panel dataset from the U.S. Census Bureau that covers virtually the entire American population from 1989-2015. Following Chetty
et al. (2020), we use de-identified data from the 2000 and 2010 decennial Censuses linked to data
from federal income tax returns and the 2005-2015 American Community Surveys to obtain information on children’s outcomes in adulthood and their parents’ characteristics. We focus primarily
on children in the 1978-1983 birth cohorts who were born in the U.S. or are authorized immigrants
who came to the U.S. in childhood. Our primary analysis sample consists of 20.5 million children,
approximately 96.2% of the total number of children in the birth cohorts we study.
1These recent studies build on a longstanding literature documenting variation in outcomes across neighborhoods
in observational data; see e.g., Jencks and Mayer (1990), Case and Katz (1991), Brooks-Gunn et al. (1993), Cutler
and Glaeser (1997), Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn (2000), and Sampson et al. (2002).
1
We construct tract-level estimates of children’s incomes in adulthood and other outcomes such
as incarceration rates and teenage birth rates by race, gender, and parents’ household income
level. We assign children to locations in proportion to the amount of their childhood they spent
growing up in each Census tract. In each tract-by-gender-by-race cell, we estimate the conditional
expectation of children’s outcomes given their parents’ household income using a univariate regression whose functional form is chosen based on estimates at the national level to capture potential
non-linearities. We suppress estimates for cells with fewer than 20 children and infuse noise in
the estimates that is inversely proportional to sample size to protect privacy, following methods
from the literature on differential privacy (Dwork 2006; Abowd and Schmutte 2015; Chetty and
Friedman 2019).2
We provide the tract-level data for public use both in the form of downloadable datasets and
in an interactive mapping tool that facilitates visualization of the spatial patterns. We illustrate
how these data can be used to understand how neighborhoods shape children’s outcomes and
support local policy using two applications: one that focuses on observational variation in children’s
outcomes and another that studies the causal effects of neighborhoods.
Our first application aims to inform the design of economic policies that target disadvantaged
families. Many policies to increase opportunity – ranging from tax credits such as Opportunity
Zones to educational interventions such as Head Start centers – use location as a predictor or “tag”
(Akerlof 1978) for having a low level of income. From the perspective of predicting children’s future
incomes, observational differences in outcomes across areas are of direct interest; it does not matter
whether these outcomes arise from the causal effect of the neighborhood or from selection.3 We
therefore present a descriptive characterization of how children’s outcomes vary across neighborhoods, with the goal of informing those who are interested in targeting low-opportunity areas about
where they should focus their attention. Our descriptive analysis yields three sets of results.
First, children’s outcomes in adulthood vary sharply across neighborhoods, even conditional on
parental income. For children with parents who earn $27,000 (the 25th percentile of the national
2The noise added to protect privacy is typically an order of magnitude smaller than the inherent noise in the
estimates due to sampling error and hence does not affect the reliability of the estimates significantly. The tractlevel estimates are generally quite precise. For example, pooling racial groups and genders, 91% of the cross-tract
variance in the predicted income ranks of children with parents at the 25th percentile is due to signal rather than
noise (population-weighted).
3More precisely, in neoclassical models of optimal taxation, the optimal policy does not depend upon the reason
that location predicts future incomes. In other settings, one may wish to distinguish between areas that have
poor outcomes because of selection vs. causal effects; for instance, interventions to improve institutions may have
particularly large returns in areas that have poor causal effects. Our point is simply that for certain questions, the
observational variation in outcomes itself is of interest; we turn to distinguish causal effects from selection in our
second application.
2
household income distribution), the standard deviation (SD) of mean household income across
tracts is approximately $6,700 in their mid-thirties (21% of mean income). More than half of
the tract-level variance is within counties; the SD of mean household income across tracts within
counties is $5,000. There is substantial variance across tracts even within the same school catchment
areas, with schools accounting for less than half of observed variance across tracts within counties.
Indeed, children’s outcomes often vary dramatically even across tracts that are a few miles apart.
For example, 44% of black men who grew up in the lowest-income families in Watts, a neighborhood
in central Los Angeles, are incarcerated on a single day (April 1, 2010 – the day of the 2010 Census).
By contrast, 6.2% of black men who grow up in families with similar incomes in central Compton,
2.3 miles south of Watts, are incarcerated on a single day.
Second, there is substantial heterogeneity in mean tract-level outcomes across subgroups. The
correlations in mean earnings between whites, blacks, and Hispanics across tracts conditional on
having parents at the 25th percentile are approximately 0.6. Returning to the example above,
Hispanic men who grew up in Watts have an incarceration rate of 4.7% – an order of magnitude
smaller than for black men raised in the same tract. We also find substantial heterogeneity across
outcomes. For instance, incarceration rates have a race-adjusted correlation of -0.3 with mean
household incomes in adulthood for men with parents at the 25th percentile across tracts. In short,
neighborhoods are not uni-dimensional: they matter differently across subgroups and outcomes.
Third, children’s outcomes differ from traditional measures of neighborhood disadvantage. We
find no association between children’s outcomes and rates of job or wage growth. For example,
Atlanta and Charlotte had exceptionally high rates of job and wage growth over the past two
decades, yet had among the lowest rates of upward mobility for children who grew up there. These
cities achieved high rates of economic growth despite offering local residents limited prospects for
upward income mobility by importing talent – i.e., attracting talented individuals to move in and
fill high-paying jobs. Job density is slightly negatively correlated with children’s outcomes across
neighborhoods within cities, challenging spatial mismatch theories (Kain 1968). The disconnect
between the availability of jobs and upward mobility illustrates that the factors that promote the
development of human capital may differ from those that lead to productive labor markets, which
have been the primary focus of existing work in urban economics (e.g., Moretti 2011, Glaeser 2011,
Moretti 2012, Gyourko et al. 2013).
In contrast with measures of job density, we find a positive correlation between the employment
rates of adults who live in a tract and rates of upward mobility for children who grow up there
3
(race-adjusted correlation = 0.3). Evidently, what predicts upward mobility is not proximity to
jobs, but growing up around people who have jobs, consistent with Case and Katz (1991). We find
even stronger correlations between children’s outcomes and other socioeconomic characteristics of
adults in an area, such as mean incomes and the share of single-parent households, consistent
with Sampson et al. (1997). We also find strong correlations with proxies for social capital and
test scores. Along all of these dimensions, what matters are characteristics in one’s own immediate
neighborhood rather than nearby areas. Poverty rates beyond a 0.6 mile radius away from the house
where a child grows up have essentially no predictive power for his or her outcomes conditional on
poverty rates within that radius. Hence, the “neighborhood” that matters for children’s outcomes
is very small.
Together, observable characteristics of neighborhoods explain half of the tract-level variance in
children’s outcomes, implying that our outcome-based estimates provide considerable new information that can help identify areas where opportunity is most lacking.4 One practical challenge
in using our estimates of social mobility to inform policy design is that they necessarily come with
a lag, as one must wait until children grow up to observe their earnings. However, the power of
tract-level outcomes in forecasting outcomes for future birth cohorts decays by only 10% over a
decade. Moreover, historical outcome data are substantially better predictors of more recent outcomes than contemporaneous observables such as poverty rates. Our estimates are thus informative
(albeit imperfect) predictors of economic opportunity even for children today.
Next, we turn to our second application, which is motivated by a simple question: “Where
should a family seeking to improve their children’s outcomes live?” The answer to this question
matters not only to individual families but also for policy design. For example, many affordable
housing programs have the goal of helping low-income families access higher-opportunity areas. For
this application, it is critical to understand whether the observational variation documented above
is driven by causal effects or selection. Does moving to an area with better observed outcomes
improve a given child’s outcomes?
To estimate the fraction of the variance in observed outcomes across tracts that is due to
causal effects of place, we first compare our observational estimates to results from the Moving to
4Existing indices of economic opportunity at the local level, such as the Neighborhood Deprivation Index (Messer
et al. 2006), the Kirwan Child Opportunity Index (Acevedo-Garcia et al. 2014), and Opportunity Nation’s Opportunity Index (Opportunity-Nation 2017), use combinations of cross-sectional covariates such as poverty rates and job
density as proxies for opportunity. The correlations between these existing measures and our statistics range from 0 to
0.6. The key advantage of our approach is that we directly measure opportunity based on children’s actual outcomes,
mitigating the need to determine which predictors provide the most useful proxies for economic opportunity.
4
Opportunity (MTO) experiment.5 The MTO experiment offered randomly selected families living
in high-poverty housing projects housing vouchers to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods. Chetty
et al. (2016) show that moving to a lower-poverty neighborhood led to large increases in earnings in
adulthood for children who moved at young ages. We find a correlation of 0.6 between the earnings
of children who were randomly assigned vouchers to move to different neighborhoods at young
ages in the MTO data and the mean earnings of children who grow up in low-income families in
those areas in our observational data. A $1,000 increase in mean earnings (conditional on parental
income) in the observational data is associated with a $700 increase in earnings in the experimental
data, suggesting that about 70% of the variance in the observational outcomes is due to causal
effects of place.
To evaluate the extent to which the observational variation reflects causal effects of place more
broadly, beyond the small number of neighborhoods included in the MTO experiment, we use the
quasi-experimental research design developed by Chetty and Hendren (2018a). We study the outcomes of children whose families move across tracts, exploiting variation in the timing of moves
between areas for identification. We find that children who move to areas with better observed
outcomes earlier in their childhood have better outcomes themselves. Under the identifying assumption that unobservable determinants of children’s outcomes in adulthood are uncorrelated
with the age at which they move to a different area – an assumption that we validate using sibling
comparisons and a set of placebo tests, as in Chetty and Hendren (2018a) – this result implies that
neighborhoods have causal effects on children’s outcomes. Growing up in a better neighborhood is
beneficial throughout childhood, but where children live as adolescents (rather than at very early
ages) is particularly influential in determining their later outcomes, consistent with Deutscher’s
(2018) recent findings in Australian data. The quasi-experimental estimates imply that about 62%
of the observational variation across tracts in the national data is due to causal effects.
Our estimates suggest that moving at birth from a neighborhood at the 25th percentile of the
distribution of upward mobility within one’s county to a neighborhood at the 75th percentile would
increase the lifetime earnings of a child growing up in a low-income family by $198,000. Of course,
the feasibility of such a move relies on being able to find affordable housing in high-opportunity
neighborhoods. Higher-opportunity tracts are more expensive on average, but the correlation be5As is now conventional in the social sciences, we use a potential outcomes framework (Neyman 1923; Holland
1986) to define notions of causality. We identify the causal effects of neighborhoods using experimental and quasiexperimental methods. However, we emphasize that the correlations with neighborhood characteristics discussed
above are associations that should not be interpreted as causal effects.
5
tween children’s mean earnings given parents at the 25th percentile and median rents is only 0.44
across tracts within commuting zones. Hence, there are many affordable high-opportunity neighborhoods in most cities.6 One explanation for the existence of such areas in spatial equilibrium
is that they have other disamenities that make them less desirable. An alternative possibility is
that families lack information about high-opportunity areas or face barriers in moving to such
places (e.g., DeLuca et al. 2019, Christensen and Timmins 2019). To distinguish between these
explanations, we divide our tract-level estimates into a component predicted by observable factors
such as poverty rates and a residual “unobservable” component. Only the observable component
is capitalized in rents, suggesting that the opportunity bargains may exist partly because families
do not know which neighborhoods have the greatest benefits for their children.
These results suggest that housing choice voucher programs could potentially be designed to
achieve even larger gains for children than those in the MTO experiment. If the families who
received experimental vouchers in MTO had moved to the areas with the best observed outcomes
in our data that were both less expensive than the areas to which they moved and closer to their
origin neighborhoods, their children’s earnings would have increased by nearly twice as much as
they did. More broadly, changes in housing policies could influence economic mobility by changing
the price of opportunity – the cost of moving to a neighborhood that delivers $1 higher earnings for
one’s child. We find that the price of opportunity is substantially higher in metro areas that have
stricter land use regulations. Relaxing such restrictions or increasing access to high-opportunity
areas through other tools could benefit not only the families who move, but all taxpayers.7
If a
child growing up in a low-income family were to move at birth from a neighborhood at the 25th
percentile of the distribution of upward mobility within his county to a neighborhood at the 75th
percentile, his higher earnings would lead to approximately a $40,000 increase in federal income
tax revenues over his lifetime.
Although the analysis in this paper focuses on identifying generalizable lessons about neighborhood effects, the strength of the tract-level data is that they allow users to reach different
conclusions in different places. To take one example, in the Midwest, children who grow up in rural
areas tend to have higher rates of upward mobility than those who grow up in urban areas. In
6We show that moving to tracts with low rents but good observed outcomes at an earlier age in childhood produces
substantial long-term gains using the quasi-experimental design described above, addressing the concern that these
tracts might just have a positive selection of families.
7These positive fiscal externalities could potentially be offset by negative externalities on higher-income families
from living in more integrated neighborhoods, e.g. because of having fewer resources per capita. They could also
be offset by externalities in the origin neighborhoods that families leave behind. We view the quantification of such
spillover effects as an important direction for future work.
6
the South, the pattern is reversed: upward mobility is higher in cities. As this example illustrates,
instead of attempting to draw general conclusions about whether cities offer better opportunities
for upward mobility, it is more informative to directly study the question in the area of interest. In
this sense, the Opportunity Atlas provides a platform that we hope will help support researchers
and policymakers seeking to improve opportunity in their own communities across the U.S.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the microdata we use. Section III
describes the methods we use to construct tract-level estimates. Section IV characterizes variation
in outcomes across tracts and discusses implications for policy targeting. Section V focuses on the
causal effects of neighborhoods and implications for moving to opportunity. Section VI concludes.
Supplementary results and methodological details are provided in an online appendix.
II Data
The sample and variables we use are essentially identical to those used by Chetty et al. (2020);
much of this section is therefore taken directly from Chetty et al. (2020, Section II).
We combine three sources of data housed at the Census Bureau: (1) the Census 2000 and
2010 short forms; (2) federal income tax returns in 1989, 1994, 1995, and 1998-2015; and (3) the
Census 2000 long form and the 2005-2015 American Community Surveys (ACS). The Census short
forms are designed to cover the entire population; the Census 2000 long form is a stratified random
sample covering approximately one-sixth of households; and the American Community Survey is a
stratified random sample covering approximately 2.5% of households in each year (U.S. Department
of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2000; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
2003; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2014).
These datasets are linked by a unique person identifier called a Protected Identification Key
(PIK) that is assigned by Census Bureau staff using information such as Social Security Numbers
(SSN), names, addresses, and dates of birth. The record linkage algorithm used to assign individuals PIKs is described in Wagner and Layne (2014). The linkage procedure is very accurate
and comprehensive: using datasets that have both SSNs and other identifiers, Layne et al. (2014)
show that the error rate in assigning PIKs when one does not have SSNs (as in Census surveys) is
typically below 1% for government datasets. In the 2010 Census, 90.3% of individuals are successfully assigned a PIK (Wagner and Layne 2014, Table 2). Bond et al. (2014) show that PIK rates
vary slightly across population subgroups in the 2010 ACS, but exceed 85% in virtually all subgroups. All analysis in this paper is conducted using a dataset that contains PIKs but is stripped
7
of personally identifiable information.
In the rest of this section, we describe how we construct our analysis sample, define the variables
we use, and present summary statistics. See Online Appendix A of Chetty et al. (2020) for further
details.
II.A Sample Definition
Our target sample frame consists of all children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts who were (1) born in
the U.S. or are authorized immigrants who came to the U.S. in childhood and (2) whose parents
were also U.S. citizens or authorized immigrants.8 We construct this sample frame in practice by
identifying all children who were claimed as a child dependent on a 1040 tax form at some point
between 1994-2015 by an adult who appears in the 2016 Numident file and was between the ages
of 15-50 at the time of the child’s birth.9 We then restrict the sample to children who were born
between 1978-83, based on their record in the 2016 Numident. This sample definition excludes
children who are unauthorized immigrants or who are claimed as dependents by unauthorized
immigrants because unauthorized immigrants do not have SSNs and therefore do not appear in the
Numident file.
We define a child’s “parent” as the person who first claims the child as a dependent (between
1994-2015). This person must be supporting the child, but may not necessarily be the child’s
biological parent.10 If the child is first claimed by a single filer, the child is defined as having a
single parent. For simplicity, we assign each child a parent (or parents) permanently using this
algorithm, regardless of any subsequent changes in parents’ marital status or dependent claiming.
Virtually all children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts are linked to parents through this procedure,
because nearly all children get claimed as dependents at some point in their childhood (Chetty
et al. 2020, Online Appendix Table II). We limit our analysis to children born during or after
1978 because many children begin to leave the household starting at age 17 (Chetty et al. 2014,
Appendix Table I), and the first year in which we have dependent claiming information is 1994.
8We also present some supplementary results, such as analyses of trends and movers’ outcomes, using an extended
sample that includes the 1978-1991 birth cohorts. We limit our analysis to individuals who are authorized immigrants
because coverage rates of tax data for unauthorized immigrants are difficult to determine.
9Dependent claiming information is not available in tax returns from 1989. We impose the 15-50 age restriction
to limit links to grandparents or other guardians who might claim a child as a dependent.
10An alternative method of identifying parents is to use information on relationships to household members in the
2000 Census short form. We find that the tax- and Census-data based measures of parents are well aligned: for
instance, among the children claimed as dependents by parents on a 1040 tax form in 2000, 93% live with the same
parents in the 2000 Census. We use the tax data to identify parents because many of the children in the oldest
cohorts in our sample have left their parents’ houses by the 2000 Census.
8
Finally, we exclude the 3.8% of children for whom we have no address information during
childhood (i.e., during or before the year in which they turn 23) because the addresses from which
their parents filed their tax returns could not be mapped to a tract. The resulting primary analysis
sample consists of 20.5 million children, which covers 96% of our target population. When reporting
race-specific estimates, we exclude an additional 5% of children for whom race is missing because
they could not be linked to the Census or ACS; however, these children are included in the estimates
that pool all racial groups, because those estimates can be constructed purely using information
from tax returns.
Chetty et al. (2020, Appendix B and Appendix Tables II-IV) show that this analysis sample
provides an accurate representation of our target population by establishing that it has income
distributions and demographic characteristics very similar to the ACS.11 They also show that pretax income measures in the tax data are closely aligned with those in survey data. For example, the
median income in 2015 of children with non-missing race who appear in both our analysis sample
and the 2015 ACS is $33,370 based on the tax data, compared with $34,000 based on the ACS
data. Individuals recorded as having zero income in the tax records (because they do not file and
have no W-2s) have a median income of only $5,000 in the ACS, showing that tax records do not
miss substantial amounts of income for non-filers.
II.B Variable Definitions
In this subsection, we briefly define the variables we use in our primary analysis; details are provided
in Online Appendix A. We measure all monetary variables in 2015 dollars, adjusting for inflation
using the consumer price index (CPI-U).
Parental Characteristics and Family Background.
Parental Income. Our primary measure of parent income is total pre-tax income at the household level, which we label parent family (or household) income.12 In years where a parent files a tax
return, we define household income as Adjusted Gross Income; for non-filers, household income is
coded as zero.13 We define our baseline parental income measure as the mean of parents’ household
11Chetty et al. (2020) impose slightly different sample restrictions given their objective of studying racial disparities:
they include only individuals with non-missing race information and do not exclude children with missing address
information during childhood.
12We use the term “household” income for convenience, but we do not include incomes from cohabitating partners
or other household members aside from the primary tax filer’s spouse.
13Prior work (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014) has used information from W-2 forms to measure income for non-filers. We
cannot follow that approach here since income data from W-2 forms are unavailable at the Census Bureau before
2005. However, this has little impact on results; Chetty et al. (2014) show that in 2000, the median W-2 income
9
income over five years: 1994, 1995, and 1998-2000, as tax records are unavailable in 1996 and 1997.
Parental Marital Status. We identify parents’ marital status based on their tax filing status in
the year the child is first claimed as a dependent by parents.
Locations. In each year, parents are assigned the address from which they filed their 1040 tax
return. For non-filers, we use address information from information returns such as W-2s.
Race. We assign race and ethnicity to parents using the information they report on the 2010
Census short form, 2000 Census short form, or the ACS.
Children’s Outcomes Observed in Tax Records or Census Short Form.
We report statistics at the Census tract, county, and commuting zone (CZ) levels for the following outcomes, which we observe in the full sample using data from either tax records or the
Census short form.
Income. We define children’s annual household income in the same way as parents’ income
except that we use data from W-2 forms to impute income for non-filers (W-2 data are available
only since 2005 and hence cannot be used to measure parents’ incomes in our sample). We measure
children’s individual and household incomes as their mean annual incomes in 2014 and 2015, when
children are between the ages of 31 and 37.
Upper-Tail Income. We define indicators for children reaching the top 20% and top 1% of the
income distribution using the baseline definitions of individual and household income above.
Employment. We use two measures of employment, one based on the tax data and one based
on the ACS (defined below). In the tax data, children are defined as working if they have positive
W-2 income in 2015.
Marriage. A child’s marital status is measured based on whether they file a tax return jointly
in 2015.
Incarceration. Using data from the 2010 Census short form, we define an individual as incarcerated on the day of the Census (April 1, 2010) based on whether they live in any of the following
types of group quarters: federal detention center, federal prison, state prison, local jail, residential
correctional facility, military jail, or juvenile correctional facility.
Teenage Birth. We define a woman as having a teenage birth if she ever claims a dependent
who was born while she was between the ages of 13 and 19. This measure is an imperfect proxy
for having a teenage birth because it only covers children who are claimed as dependents by their
among parents who were non-filers was $29, and only 2.9% of parents do not file in a given year. Information from
W-2s is more important when measuring the incomes of children in early adulthood, for whom we do have W-2 data
at the Census Bureau.
10
mothers. Nevertheless, the aggregate level and spatial pattern of teenage births in our data are
closely aligned with estimates based on the American Community Survey, with an (unweighted)
correlation across states of 0.79.
Spouse’s Income. For children who were married in 2015, we define spouse income analogously
to the child’s own individual income using an average of 2014 and 2015 individual income. To
capture spouses who are not within our primary analysis sample, we include all spouses born
between 1973 and 1989.
Living in a Low-Poverty Neighborhood in Adulthood. We measure children’s locations in adulthood based on the address from which they file tax returns in 2015. We identify those living in a
“low-poverty” neighborhood as those living in a tract with less than 10% of people living in poverty,
as defined by the publicly available Census 2010 estimates.
Staying in Childhood CZ or Tract. Children are defined as staying in their childhood location
(tract or CZ) if their most recent address matches any tract or CZ that they lived in during
childhood (before age 23).
Staying with Parents. Children are defined as staying with their parents if their 2015 address
matches their parents’ 2015 address.
Income for those who Stay in Childhood CZ. We measure income among the children who stay
in their childhood CZ using the baseline definitions of household and individual income described
above.
Fraction of Childhood Years Spent in Tract. We calculate the fraction of childhood years that a
child spends in a tract as the total number of years we observe the child in a given tract (based on
their parents’ tax returns) divided by the total number of years for which address data is available
for the child’s birth cohort before age 23.
Children’s Outcomes Observed in ACS or Census Long Form.
We report statistics at the county and CZ (but not tract) level for the following outcomes,
which we observe for the subsample of individuals who appear in the Census 2000 long form or the
2005-2015 ACS.
Employment. In the ACS, children are defined as working if they report positive weeks worked
in the past year. This and all other employment-related ACS measures described below are defined
only among children who receive the ACS at age 30 or later.
Hours Worked Per Week. Annual hours of work are measured in the ACS as the product of
hours worked per week and weeks worked per year. Those not working in any week are coded as
11
having zero hours of work.
Hourly Wage. Hourly wages are measured in the ACS by dividing reported annual wage and
salary income by annual hours worked. The hourly wage is coded as missing for those with zero
hours worked.
Educational Attainment. We measure children’s educational attainment based on the highest
level of education they report having completed. We say a student dropped out of high school if
their educational attainment is “12th grade- no diploma” or less (hence, those with GEDs are not
counted as having dropped out).
Income for Children with Native or Immigrant Mothers. We measure income among the children
whose mothers are U.S. natives or immigrants using the baseline definitions of household and
individual income described above. Children are defined as having a “native-born” mother if their
mother was surveyed in the 2000 Census long form or the ACS and reported being born in the
United States in either survey. Children are defined as having an immigrant mother if their mother
received either survey and reported being born outside of the United States.
II.C Summary Statistics
Table I lists the variables included in the Opportunity Atlas and provides summary statistics for
those variables in our primary analysis sample. We present statistics for the full population as well
as by gender. Online Appendix Table I presents analogous statistics by race and ethnicity.
Pooling all races and ethnicities, the median household income of parents in our primary analysis
sample is $56,730. Parental income and marital status vary sharply across racial and ethnic groups,
as is well known from prior work. For example, median household income is $71,470 for whites,
$29,600 for blacks, and $33,470 for Hispanics. 79.6% of white children are raised in two-parent
families, compared with 32.5% of black children and 57.2% of Hispanic children.
The median household income among children in 2014-15 (between the ages of 31-37) is $42,360,
while median individual earnings is $29,440. 1.5% of children are incarcerated on April, 2010
(between ages 27-32). 19.7% of women have a teenage birth. 69.5% earned some college credits.
These outcomes again vary sharply across subgroups; for example, incarceration rates range from
0.2% for white women to 10.3% for black men, while teenage birth rates range from 13.5% for white
women to 41.3% for black women.
12
III Tract-Level Estimates: Methodology
In this section, we describe how we construct our publicly available tract-level estimates. We first
define our estimands of interest, then describe our estimator and its properties, and finally discuss
the estimates we release publicly.
Let yi denote an outcome for child i, such as his or her income in adulthood. Throughout our
analysis, we measure both children’s and parents’ incomes using percentile ranks rather than dollar
levels. Chetty et al. (2014) show that measuring income using ranks yields more robust estimates
by reducing the influence of outliers and mitigating lifecycle bias because individuals’ income ranks
stabilize earlier in their lives than their income levels (Solon 1999, Haider and Solon, 2006, Grawe,
2006). We define child i’s percentile rank yi based on his position in the national distribution of
incomes (measured between ages 31-37 in our baseline analysis) relative to all others in his birth
cohort who are in our primary analysis sample.14 Similarly, we measure the percentile rank of the
parents of child i, p(i), based on their position in the national distribution of parental income for
child i’s birth cohort. We always hold the definition of these ranks fixed based on positions in the
national aggregate income distribution, even when analyzing subgroups or local areas.
Our objective is to estimate children’s expected outcomes given their parents’ income percentile
p, racial and ethnic group r, and gender g, conditional on growing up in Census tract c from birth:
y¯cprg = E[yi
|c(i) = c, p(i) = p, r(i) = r, g(i) = g]. (1)
We focus on characterizing how the neighborhoods in which children grow up affect their outcomes,
which may differ from the neighborhoods in which they live as adults. We focus on childhood
neighborhoods because of prior evidence that rates of intergenerational mobility depend on where
children grow up rather than where they live as adults (Chetty et al. 2016; Chetty and Hendren
2018a).
There are two empirical challenges in estimating the conditional mean ¯ycprg in practice. First,
there are insufficient observations to estimate ¯ycprg non-parametrically in each parent income percentile by race by gender by tract cell. Second, most children do not grow up in a single tract
from birth, forcing us to account for movement across tracts when estimating mean outcomes. We
construct an estimator that addresses each of these two challenges in turn.
Parametric Estimator. To address the first challenge, we estimate the conditional expectation
14We include children with zero income, assigning them the mean rank of the individuals in that group. For
example, if 10% of a birth cohort has zero income, all children with zero income would receive a percentile rank of 5.
13
of children’s outcomes given their parents’ household income using a univariate regression in each
tract by gender by race cell. We choose the parametric form of the regression by examining the
relationship between outcomes and parental income rank non-parametrically at the national level.
To illustrate, Figure Ia plots the mean household income rank of children within each percentile
bin of the parent income distribution for whites, blacks, and Hispanics, E[yi
|p(i) = p, r(i) = r].
Figure Ib replicates Figure Ia using incarceration rates as the outcome, restricting attention to male
children. There are significant non-linearities in the conditional expectation functions, especially
for incarceration.
To capture these non-linearities, we regress children’s outcomes on a tract-invariant transformation of parental income rank frg(pi):
yi = αcrg + βcrg × frg(pi) + εi
, (2)
where frg(pi) is estimated using a lowess regression of ¯yprg on p in each race by gender subgroup
at the national level. Intuitively, we first fit a lowess regression to the non-parametric conditional
expectation functions plotted in Figure I to find a transformation of parental income rank frg(pi)
that renders the relationship between yi and frg(pi) linear at the national level. We then run a
linear regression of the outcome on transformed parental income in each tract-race-gender cell as
in (2) and use the predicted values of this regression at each percentile p as our estimate of ¯ycprg.
15
We obtain standard errors for ˆycprg directly from the regression in (2), assuming homoskedastic
errors εi at the individual level and treating frg as known with certainty.
This estimation approach, which is analogous to a Box-Cox transformation (Box and Cox 1964),
allows us to summarize the conditional expectation function in each tract using just two parameters,
thereby yielding precise estimates of expected outcomes. The assumption underlying this estimator
is that the shape of the conditional expectation of the outcome given parental income at the national
level is preserved in each tract up to an affine transformation (within each race-gender subgroup).
We evaluate this assumption by adding a quadratic term (f(pi))2
to (2) and examining whether
the estimates change. In general, we find the estimates remain very similar; for example, tract-level
estimates of children’s mean household income ranks given parents at p = 25 based on the linear
15Mechanically, in each tract-race-gender cell, we estimate αcrg and βcrg in (2) by regressing the outcome yi on
the predicted values from a lowess regression (with bandwidth 0.3) of ¯yprg on p estimated by race and gender at
the national level. For outcomes obtained from the ACS samples and for all outcomes for small racial subgroups
(Asians, American Indians, Other), the lowess estimates at the national level are themselves noisy and are sometimes
non-monotonic. In these cases, if the race-by-gender specific lowess fit exhibits any non-monotonicities, we use the
functional form estimated from the lowess regression of the outcome on parent income percentile pooling all races
and genders.
14
and quadratic models are correlated 0.99. We also estimate the conditional expectation functions
non-parametrically in large CZs and counties and find that non-parametric estimates at these levels
of geography are well approximated by an affine transformation of the national relationship. Hence,
although the shape-preservation assumption underlying our estimator is strong, it appears to be a
reasonable approximation in practice.
Exposure Weighting. If children spent their entire childhood in a single tract c, (2) would yield
an unbiased estimate of ¯ycprg under the assumption described above. In practice, many children
move across tracts in childhood.16 To address this issue, first note that the CZ in which one grows
up has causal effects on earnings and other outcomes in adulthood until approximately age 23
(Chetty and Hendren 2018a), a finding that we replicate at the tract level in Section V below. We
therefore assign children to tracts in proportion to the amount of time they spend before age 23 in
each tract over the years observed in our sample. For example, if a child spent half of his childhood
in the tract 1 and half of his childhood in tract 2, he would effectively receive 50% weight in each
of the two tracts c = {1, 2} in the regression in (2).17
The estimates ˆycprg obtained from this exposure-weighted regression differ from our target
y¯cprg – the mean outcomes of children who spend their entire childhood in tract c – in two ways.
First, they assign equal weight to all years of childhood, effectively assuming that each year of
exposure between ages 0 and 23 contributes equally to children’s long-term outcomes. In practice,
neighborhoods appear to have slightly larger effects during adolescence than in the earliest years
of childhood (see Figure XI). However, the differences in marginal effects by age are small enough
that our baseline estimates based on equal weighting are very similar to estimates obtained using
age-specific weights corresponding to the marginal age-specific treatment effects estimated below
(e.g., correlation = 0.997 for mean household income rank given p = 25 across tracts).
Second, the estimates ˆycprg are biased because the outcomes yi observed for children who live
in other tracts incorporate the other tracts’ causal effects, which may differ from ¯ycprg. In general,
we expect this bias to lead us to understate the true variance in observed outcomes across tracts
relative to what one would observe if children grew up in a single tract for their entire childhood.
16Chetty and Hendren (2018a) address this issue by restricting the sample to “permanent residents” – children
who never move across CZs during their entire childhood. That approach yields imprecise estimates at the tract
level because few children stay in a single tract for their entire childhood; for instance, among children born in 1991
(for whom we have a near-complete address history from birth to age 23), only 27% of children spend their entire
childhood in a single tract.
17More precisely, we estimate the regression in (2) weighting by the total number of years the child is claimed as a
dependent in tract c before age 23. Since the tax records begin in 1989, the earliest age at which we observe children’s
locations in our primary analysis sample is age 6 (for the 1983 birth cohort).
15
Intuitively, children who spend part of their childhood in a tract with very positive observed effects
will tend to spend the rest of their childhood in a worse tract on average because of mean reversion,
pulling down yi (and hence ˆycprg) relative to ¯ycprg. This bias also turns out to be small empirically,
for two reasons. First, although children move, most children spend the majority of their childhood
in one tract. Children observed in a given tract spend 75% of their childhood in that tract (using
the same weights as in our regression specification). Second, even when children move, they tend
to move to an area very similar to the one in which they previously lived. Among children who
move, the correlation between ¯ycprg and ¯yc
0prg in the two tracts c and c
0
in which they spend the
most time is 0.86 for mean household income rank given p = 25.18 Given these parameters, if
the variation across tracts were driven entirely by causal effects of place that are proportional to
childhood exposure, the correlation between ˆycprg and ¯ycprg would be
Corr(ˆycprg, y¯cprg) = Corr(0.75¯ycprg + 0.25¯yc
0prg, y¯cprg) = 0.75 + 0.25 × 0.86 = 0.96. (3)
We conclude that the exposure-weighted regression estimates obtained from the parametric model
in (2) are likely to provide accurate estimates of the conditional means of interest in (1).19
Publicly Available Estimates. After constructing the estimates described above for all tracts
and subgroups, we take three final steps to construct the publicly available statistics.
First, we suppress estimates that are based on 20 or fewer children both to protect privacy
and because such estimates typically have very large standard errors. Since most subgroups tend
to be concentrated in specific tracts, this suppression leads us to omit relatively little data: the
publicly available statistics that pool racial groups and genders cover 99.9% of the individuals in
the microdata and the race-specific statistics cover 96% of individuals.
Second, to further reduce the risk of privacy loss, we add noise to the estimates we release,
following the method developed in Chetty and Friedman (2019). We release estimates for each
race-gender-tract cell at two parent income percentiles, typically p = 25 and p = 75.20 We add
independent, normally distributed noise to each of these estimates. The standard deviation of
18To eliminate spurious correlations driven by having the same individual’s data appear in both tracts, we estimate
this correlation by first constructing two sets of tract-level estimates, randomly splitting our sample into two at the
individual level, and then estimating the correlations across these two samples.
19The correlation of 0.96 is not an exact estimate because it assumes individuals move at most once for simplicity
and, more importantly, it assumes that the observational variation across places is entirely due to causal childhood
exposure effects. In the presence of selection effects (which may not be proportional to childhood exposure), the
correlation would differ. Nevertheless, this calculation illustrates that the exposure weighted estimates are unlikely
to differ substantially from the mean outcomes one would observe if children did not move across tracts.
20In tracts where fewer that 10% of parents are above the median (p > 50), we release estimates at p = 1 and
p = 50; conversely, if fewer than 10% of parents are below the median, we release estimates at p = 50 and p = 100.
16
the noise distribution is chosen based on the sensitivity of the estimates to a single individual’s
data, as in the literature on statistical disclosure limitation (Dwork 2006; Abowd and Schmutte
2015). We calculate the sensitivity of the estimates by calculating the maximum change in the
estimate ˆycprg that can result from adding a single observation to the relevant tract-race-gender
cell.21 We then compute the maximum sensitivity of the estimates across all tracts within a given
state. We add noise with SD proportional to this maximum state-level sensitivity divided by the
number of observations in the relevant subgroup (ncrg) and a parameter ε that controls the degree
of disclosure risk, which we set at ε = 8. We add noise to the standard errors of the estimates
following an analogous procedure. We report the SD of the noise added to each tract-level estimate
in the publicly available data. Importantly, because the SD of the noise we add is proportional to
1/ncprg, it is typically significantly smaller than the inherent noise in the estimate from sampling
error, which is proportional to 1/
√ncprg.
22
Third, to facilitate interpretation of our estimates of mean ranks, we use a crosswalk that maps
percentile ranks to dollar values for each monetary variable (e.g., individual income, household
income). This crosswalk is constructed based on the income distribution of children in our primary analysis sample in 2014-2015 for our baseline income measures. We report estimates of the
dollar value (in real 2015 dollars) corresponding to the mean predicted rank of children using this
crosswalk.23
The final tract-level estimates in the Opportunity Atlas are available through an interactive
mapping tool and in downloadable flat files.24 A complete list of the variables along with a codebook
are available in the Online Data Tables. For each of the outcome variables listed in Section II.B, we
release means by parental income group, race, and gender as well as unconditional means (pooling all
parental income levels) by race and gender. We report estimates at 5 parental income levels: lowest
income (p = 1, incomes of approximately $1, 000), low income (p = 25, $27, 000), middle income
21Because all of the outcome variables we analyze are bounded, this value is well-defined.
22Because the noise added is independent across subgroups, the estimates we report do not aggregate perfectly:
for example, the estimates for men and women in a tract may not aggregate to the pooled estimate we report. The
addition of noise can also result in values that fall outside the bounds of the original variables – for example negative
incomes or employment rates above 100%. We report these values directly in the raw downloadable data so that
researchers can compute unbiased aggregate moments, but bottom-code and top-code values at their natural bounds
in the data visualization tool.
23Of course, this estimate cannot be interpreted as the mean income of children because the rank transformation
is not linear; it merely provides a useful way to interpret the mean rank estimates.
24We release raw point estimates without correcting for excess variance due to sampling error because the optimal
shrinkage procedure depends upon the policy question of interest and the loss function; this allows researchers to
adjust our raw estimates as appropriate for their application. The reliability of the tract-level estimates is generally
quite high (see Section IV below), so the optimal degree of shrinkage is small in most applications.
17
(p = 50, $55, 000), high income (p = 75, $93, 000), and highest income (p = 100, $1, 100, 000).
We also release estimates at the county and CZ levels, which are constructed using methods
analogous to those described above. Because outcomes in the American Community Survey (such
as college attendance) are available for a small sample of individuals, we only report estimates at
the county and CZ levels for those outcomes.
IV Observational Variation and Targeting
Many policies aimed at improving children’s outcomes are targeted based on neighborhood characteristics. For example, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 provides preferential tax treatment for
investment in Opportunity Zones – low-opportunity neighborhoods designated by states. Children
who live in disadvantaged Census tracts are granted preferential status for admission to Chicago’s
selective public high schools. Head Start (early childhood education and care) centers are often
placed in high-poverty neighborhoods to serve children with the most limited opportunities. And
environmental remediation projects, such as lead removal, target specific Census tracts partly based
on proxies such as poverty rates and the age of the housing stock.
In the terminology of models of optimal taxation, all of these policies use neighborhood characteristics as a predictor or “tag” for being disadvantaged (Akerlof 1978). By targeting disadvantaged
neighborhoods, these policies have the potential to more efficiently provide resources to those who
need them most. However, it is not clear that the proxies that are currently used for targeting
– such as neighborhood poverty rates – are the best predictors of areas where children are likely
to have the lowest (future) incomes in adulthood. Here, we explore whether our new measures of
children’s outcomes by Census tract can be useful for targeting policies to neighborhoods where
children have the poorest prospects of climbing the income ladder.25
From the perspective of identifying predictors for children’s future incomes, the observed outcomes in each Census tract are of direct interest. It does not matter whether those outcomes arise
from the causal effect of the neighborhood itself or from selection in who chooses to live in that
neighborhood. Motivated by this reasoning, in this section, we present a descriptive characterization of the observational variation in children’s outcomes across Census tracts.
We organize our analysis into four parts, each of which addresses a different question about
25Of course, the policies described above may be designed with other objectives in mind beyond predicting where
children grow up to have the lowest incomes. We do not take a normative stance on the right objective function;
our goal here is simply to evaluate whether and how the Opportunity Atlas measures of children’s outcomes can be
useful if one’s objective were to identify areas where children have poor prospects for upward mobility.
18
the utility of our tract-level estimates as tags and, more broadly, sheds new light on the nature of
neighborhood-level variation in children’s outcomes. First, we characterize the amount of variation
in upward income mobility across tracts to quantify the extent to which location is a useful tag
for future outcomes. Second, we examine whether tract-level outcomes are heterogeneous across
subgroups to understand whether there are gains from targeting based on the interaction of location
and other individual characteristics. Third, we study the correlations between children’s outcomes
and the observable characteristics of neighborhoods to determine how much new information our
outcome-based measures provide beyond the measures currently used to target place-based policies.
Finally, we analyze how our tract-level estimates change over time to assess whether our estimates
of upward mobility (based on children born in the 1980s) provide useful information for targeting
policies to children growing up today.
IV.A Variation in Outcomes Across Census Tracts
We begin by characterizing the variation in children’s outcomes across Census tracts using some
illustrative examples. In much of our analysis, we focus on children’s mean household income ranks
given parents at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution (roughly $27,000), which
we term “upward mobility” for convenience.
Illustrative Example: Los Angeles. Figure IIa maps upward mobility in the Los Angeles (LA)
metro area, by the tract in which children grew up, estimated using the method described in
Section III. Rates of upward mobility are much lower in the center of LA than in surrounding
areas. Children growing up in the bottom decile of neighborhoods shown on this map in terms of
upward mobility (shown in the darkest red colors) have predicted mean income ranks in adulthood
below 35.0 (roughly $25,700). Those growing up in the highest decile of neighborhoods (shown in
the darkest blue colors) have predicted income ranks above 49.7 (roughly $42,000).26
Part of the variation across neighborhoods in Figure IIa is due to differences in rates of upward
mobility across racial and ethnic groups. Chetty et al. (2020) document that black children –
and black men in particular – have much lower rates of upward mobility even if they grow up on
exactly the same block. Since central Los Angeles has a much larger black population than the
suburbs, the lower rates of upward mobility in the center partly reflect the distinct challenges that
black Americans face in climbing the income ladder rather than something specific about those
26An important caveat to keep in mind is that some of these estimates are based on statistical extrapolation, as
there are few low-income families living in coastal areas of Los Angeles such as Santa Monica. Nevertheless, under the
maintained assumptions of our statistical model described in Section III above, these estimates constitute a consistent
prediction of how well low-income children would do if they were able to grow up in such areas.
19
neighborhoods.
Even within racial groups, however, there is considerable variation across neighborhoods (click
here for an interactive illustration). Panel B of Figure II plots upward mobility for black male
children. Black men’s rates of upward mobility vary widely within central LA.27 Low-income black
men who grow up in Watts reach the 17th percentile of the household income distribution as adults
on average.28 This corresponds to a household income of roughly $7,300 (s.e. $2,600) in 2015,
when these men are in their mid-thirties.29 These low income levels may not be surprising to those
familiar with LA given the widely documented challenges that Watts has faced in terms of poverty
and violence. What may be more surprising, however, is that in nearby Compton – just 2.3 miles
south of Watts – the outcomes of black men growing up in families with comparable incomes are
quite different. In Central Compton, black men grow up to have average household incomes of
$19,100 (s.e. $2,100).
The disparities across areas are particularly stark for incarceration. Since incarceration rates
vary non-linearly with parental income and are much higher among children growing up in the
very poorest families (Figure Ib), we focus on incarceration rates among children growing up in
the lowest-income families (bottom 1%). Figure IId shows that 44.1% (s.e. 10.9%) of black males
growing up in the poorest (bottom 1%) families in Watts were incarcerated on April 1, 2010.30
In contrast, 6.2% (s.e. 5.0%) of black men who grew up in the lowest-income families in central
Compton were incarcerated on April 1, 2010.
National Statistics. Table II generalizes this example and shows that there is considerable
variation between nearby neighborhoods not just in Los Angeles but throughout the United States.
Panel A shows statistics on the distribution of upward mobility across tracts, pooling all races
(column 1) and separately for each race (columns 2-6). The first row of the table reports mean
upward mobility across all tracts, weighting by the number of children from below-median income
households in each tract. On average, children with parents at the 25th percentile reach the 40th
percentile of the household income distribution, consistent with Figure Ia.
27We have insufficient data to report estimates in the suburbs for black men, reflecting the degree of racial segregation in Los Angeles.
28This particular statistic is for a tract in Watts that contains the Nickerson Garden public housing project. For
convenience, we refer to tracts by neighborhood names in this paper, but quote statistics from specific tracts within
those neighborhoods.
29The standard errors we report include both sampling error and the error due to noise infusion to protect privacy
(see Section III). For monetary variables, our regression models yield standard error estimates in ranks; we translate
these estimates into dollars by averaging the absolute changes in dollar income resulting from moving up or down
the income distribution in 2015 by one rank starting from the point estimate.
30This is not an out-of-sample extrapolation, as the mean household income rank of black parents in our sample
in Watts is 21.
20
The second row of Table IIa reports the raw standard deviation (SD) of our estimates across
tracts in the U.S. Pooling all racial groups, the SD of our estimates of upward mobility (ˆycprg) is
6.51 percentiles. Part of the variation in ˆycprg is due to noise – both from sampling error (as there
are approximately 500 children per tract in our sample on average) and the random noise added
to the estimates to protect privacy (see Section III). As a result, SD(ˆycprg) overstates the degree
of variation in the conditional expectation of children’s outcomes (¯ycprg) across tracts, SD(¯ycprg).
Under the statistical model in Section III, we can estimate the signal variance V ar(¯ycprg) by subtracting the variance due to sampling error and the variance due to noise infusion from V ar(ˆycprg),
as both of these errors are orthogonal to our point estimates. The variance of the noise added to
protect privacy is exogenously specified. We estimate the variance due to the sampling error as the
mean standard error squared, using the standard errors from the regression specification in (2). In
the pooled sample, the noise SD from these two sources is 1.97 percentiles, as shown in the third
row of Table IIa. Hence, (1.97/6.51)2 = 9% of the raw variance in our tract-level estimates is due
to noise and 91% is due to signal, as shown in the fourth row of Table IIa.
These estimates imply that the signal SD of upward mobility across tracts is 6.20 percentiles
(approximately $6,689), as shown in the fifth row of Table IIa. We also find substantial variation
across areas within racial groups, especially for whites, Asians, and American Indians, for whom
the signal SD is around 5.7 percentiles. There is less variability for black and Hispanics across
areas, with an SD of approximately 3.5 percentiles. Naturally, the reliability of the race-specific
estimates is slightly lower (around 0.6-0.7) because samples are smaller for racial subgroups.
Panel B of Table II replicates the preceding analysis for incarceration. Here, we again find
substantial variation across tracts relative to the mean. This is especially the case for low-income
black men, for whom the signal SD in incarceration rates is 4.3 percentage points, consistent with
the variation observed in Figure Ib. Reliability for incarceration is generally lower overall than for
income because it is a relatively rarely observed outcome. However, there are large outliers in rates
of incarceration (such as Watts) that can be detected with great precision, as illustrated by the
standard errors of the estimates reported in Figure IId.31
Panel C of Table II considers mean household income for children with high-income parents
(parents at the 75th percentile). We continue to find substantial variation across neighborhoods in
the outcomes of children from relatively high-income families, although the degree of variation is
31For subgroups that have small sample sizes and very low incarceration rates, such as Asian men, there is essentially
no signal in the estimates – reliability is 0 – and we therefore omit these data from the interactive tool and analyses
that follow.
21
slightly smaller than at low income levels, especially as a percentage of income.
Geographical Decomposition. Next, we decompose the variation across tracts geographically, by
estimating the fraction of the signal variance across tracts that is within counties, across counties
within commuting zones, and between commuting zones.32 We estimate these variance components
as the adjusted R-squared from regressions of the tract-level estimates on CZ and county fixed
effects, removing the variance due to noise. Figure III shows that 32% of the variation in upward
income mobility across tracts, pooling all racial groups, is at the CZ level, while 13.5% is across
counties within CZs. The remaining 54.5% of the variation in tract-level upward mobility is across
tracts within counties. Prior studies of the geography of intergenerational mobility that focus on
variation across counties or CZs (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014) thus miss a substantial share of the
variation in outcomes across places that one can observe when one “zooms in” to finer levels of
geography.
One natural hypothesis for the variation across tracts within counties is that children in different
parts of a county attend different schools, which attract different types of families and may differ
in their value-added (Black 1999, Bayer et al. 2007). As a simple method of assessing the potential
explanatory power of schools, we examine the fraction of variance that is across tracts within high
school catchment areas vs. between high school catchment areas.33 Figure III shows that 28% of
the total variance in outcomes – and about half of the local tract-within-county variation – can be
explained by school catchment area fixed effects.34 Hence, although a significant share of the tractlevel variation in outcomes could potentially be due to school effects, there is clearly substantial
variation in outcomes even across neighborhoods among children who attend the same high school.
32Commuting zones are aggregations of counties analogous to metropolitan statistical areas, but provide a complete
partition of the entire United States.
33We assign Census tracts to high school catchment areas in 2017 using data generously provided to us by Peter
Bergman on the intersection of Census tracts with high school catchment boundaries in 2017, obtained from Maponics
(2017); see Online Appendix B for details. We match 71,720 tracts to school catchment zones, covering roughly 97%
of the population. Since school catchment areas do not perfectly nest Census tracts, we assign tracts to the school
catchment zone that contains the largest share of their land area. Using information on exact school catchment
boundaries in Mecklenburg County, NC we estimate that only 9.6% of the population gets misclassified into the
wrong school catchment area using this approach because high school catchment boundaries follow tract boundaries
fairly closely (see Online Appendix Figure I).
34Insofar as there is spatial autocorrelation in outcomes across tracts for reasons unrelated to schools, this estimate
likely provides an upper bound on the portion of the variance in outcomes that can be attributed to schools, since
any randomly drawn set of contiguous tracts would share a common variance component in the presence of spatial
autocorrelation. However, in the other direction, our use of 2017 high school catchment boundaries may lead us
to understate the role of schools because they do not reflect the boundaries faced by children in our sample, who
attended school in the 1990s and early 2000s. In practice, tract boundaries appear to be reasonably stable over time:
87% of tract pairs that fell on different sides of school catchment boundaries in 2002 in Charlotte did so in 2017 as
well. Moreover, when examining variation in outcomes for more recent birth cohorts up to the 1989 birth cohort, we
find no evidence that schools explain a larger share of the variance for more recent cohorts.
22
Overall, the analysis above shows that the neighborhood in which a child grows up is a significant
predictor of his or her later life outcomes, even at a very local level. As a rough benchmark, note
that a 1 SD increase in parental income rank is associated with approximately a 10 percentile
increase in children’s household income ranks. Since the signal SD of upward mobility across tracts
is 6.2 percentiles, growing up in a tract with 1 SD higher upward mobility is associated with an
income gain that is roughly equivalent to the income gain from a 0.62 SD increase in parental
income. Given that parental income is used as a screen for many policies, this comparison suggests
that the outcome-based measures of neighborhood quality constructed here could also be valuable
tags.
IV.B Multi-Dimensional Neighborhoods
Neighborhoods are often conceptualized in a one-dimensional manner – as either “good” or “bad”
for everyone, for all outcomes. In this subsection, we investigate whether that simplification is a
good approximation. We again begin with the example of Los Angeles and then present national
statistics.
Heterogeneity Across Demographic Groups. Figure IIc maps upward mobility for black women
in central Los Angeles. Black women have considerably higher rates of upward mobility than
black men growing up in the same neighborhoods. For example, black women who grow up in lowincome (25th percentile) families in Watts have a mean household income rank of 29.0 in adulthood,
corresponding to an income of $19,489 (s.e. $1,985) – nearly three times higher than income of black
men who grow up in exactly the same area. But it is not always the case that black women earn
much more than black men: in Compton, black men who grow up in low-income (25th percentile)
families earn $19,141, while black women who grow up in low-income families earn $21,509. We
find analogous heterogeneity in outcomes by race and ethnicity. For example, 4.7% of Hispanic
males in the lowest income (bottom 1%) families who grew up in Watts were incarcerated on April
1, 2010 – far less than the 44.1% rate for black males.
Panel A of Table III generalizes these examples by presenting correlations of upward mobility
across racial and ethnic groups.35 We estimate these correlations across tracts within CZs by demeaning all variables by CZ and weighting by the number of low-income children in each tract.
The correlations are all positive – places where one racial group does better tend to have better
35These correlations are signal correlations; we adjust for attenuation in the raw correlations due to sampling error
and noise infusion by dividing the raw correlation by the product of the square root of the reliability estimates for
the two subgroups.
23
outcomes for other racial groups as well. However, they are far from 1, showing that neighborhoods
are not well described by a single factor model. We find similar results when examining heterogeneity in outcomes by parental income level. This is shown in the last column of Table III, which lists
the correlation between mean household income ranks for children with parents at the 25th and
75th percentiles for each racial group. In general, children from high-income families tend to have
higher incomes in areas where children from low-income families do better, but the correlations are
again well below 1.36
Heterogeneity Across Outcomes. We find heterogeneity not just across groups but also across
outcomes for a given group. Panel B of Table III shows correlations of mean outcomes across
tracts for children with parents at the 25th percentile (using a split-sample approach to correct
for correlated measurement error across outcomes). We control for race when estimating these
correlations by estimating separate correlations for each of the five racial and ethnic groups listed
in Table II and then taking a mean of these five correlations, weighting by each group’s national
population share in the 2000 Decennial Census. There are strong correlations between many of
these variables – especially those that measure similar outcomes – but some of the correlations
are well below 1. For example, the signal correlation between incarceration rates (for men) and
employment rates is -0.367, showing that the determinants of joblessness and incarceration differ.
Figure IV explores the relationship between teenage birth rates and upward mobility in greater
depth by plotting upward mobility for white women vs. teen birth rates for white women raised
in low-income families by tract (restricting to tracts with at least 100 observations). The two
outcomes are clearly related. In neighborhoods with high teen birth rates, upward mobility is
almost always low. However, when teenage birth rates are low, there is a wide spectrum of rates
of upward mobility. Hence, from a predictive perspective, low teen birth rates are a necessary
but not sufficient condition for having high rates of upward income mobility.37 Because teenage
birth outcomes can be measured at earlier ages than incomes, they can potentially be useful for
identifying neighborhoods where upward income mobility is likely to be quite low.
In sum, we should not think of neighborhood quality – or the policies that might improve it –
homogeneously. It may be more effective to design policies that target specific subgroups in ways
36This correlation could potentially be upward biased because the 25th and 75th percentile outcomes in each tract
are estimated using a single regression run on the same underlying sample. Using a split-sample approach – estimating
the 25th percentile outcomes only using data for below-median income families and the 75th percentile outcomes only
using data for above-median income families – yields very similar results.
37We find qualitatively similar patterns for other outcomes, such as incarceration rates, but this result is most stark
for teenage birth.
24
that directly address the particular challenges they face using the data on outcomes constructed
here.
IV.C Correlations with Neighborhood Characteristics
In this subsection, we ask whether the differences in children’s outcomes across tracts documented
above can be predicted using data on observable characteristics of neighborhoods. Would one be
able to do as well by targeting policies based on neighborhood characteristics such as poverty rates,
as is common practice at present? More generally, what are the characteristics of places that have
high upward mobility?
We study these questions in Figure V by reporting correlations between upward income mobility
and various neighborhood characteristics.38 We report race-controlled correlations (computing
correlations separately for each race and taking a population-weighted average). To isolate variation
across neighborhoods as opposed to the broad geographies studied in earlier work (e.g., Chetty et al.
2014), we include CZ fixed effects and study the correlations across tracts within CZs. The figure
plots the magnitude of univariate correlations with various characteristics; green circles represent
positive correlations, while red triangles show negative correlations. Details on the construction
and definitions of the neighborhood characteristics used in Figure V are given in Online Appendix
B.
Jobs. We begin by analyzing the association between upward mobility and local access to jobs.
Using data from the publicly available LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES)
dataset, we count the number of jobs within 5 miles of the centroid of a tract. The first row of
Figure V shows that this measure is slightly negatively associated with upward mobility, with a
correlation of -0.174 (s.e. = 0.004). The number of “high-paying” (annual pre-tax wages above
$40,000) jobs exhibits a similar pattern. We also find small correlations with the rate of job growth
between 2004-2013, the period when children in our sample were entering the labor market. In
short, there is little evidence of a positive association between local availability of jobs and upward
mobility, challenging spatial mismatch theories of economic opportunity (Kain 1968).
One potential explanation for these results is that job availability does not matter at short
distances, but matters at a labor-market level. To evaluate this hypothesis, Figure VI presents a
scatter plot of upward mobility vs. job growth for the fifty largest commuting zones, geographic
38Correlations between the other outcomes analyzed in Table III and observable characteristics are qualitatively
similar to those documented below. Correlations with mean income ranks for children with parents at the 75th
percentile are also similar (Online Appendix Figure II).
25
areas that are widely used to approximate local labor markets. Even at the CZ level, there is
no association between low-income children’s earnings in adulthood and job growth rates. For
example, Atlanta and Charlotte both experienced very high rates of job and wage growth over
the past two decades, yet they had among the lowest rates of upward mobility for children who
grew up there. These cities achieve high rates of economic growth because they are magnets for
talent – i.e., they attract high-skilled people to move in and fill high-paying jobs. By contrast,
Minneapolis experienced much slower job growth (18%) but had higher rates of upward mobility
for children who grew up there. We find similar results when controlling for race by focusing on
upward mobility for whites, when looking at metropolitan areas instead of CZs, and when using
measures of wage growth instead of job growth (Online Appendix Figures III-IV).39
These findings show that a booming labor market does not automatically translate into greater
upward mobility for local residents. Hence, policies targeted based on job growth rates would reach
quite different areas from the places where upward mobility is lowest. More broadly, the factors
that lead to highly productive labor markets with high rates of job, wage, and productivity growth
apparently differ from the factors that promote human capital development and result in high levels
of upward income mobility for residents.
In contrast to the lack of correlation with measures of job availability, we find a strong positive
correlation of 0.347 (s.e. 0.004) between the employment rates of the local residents in a neighborhood and the outcomes of children who grow up there. Evidently, what predicts upward mobility
is not proximity to jobs, but growing up around people who have jobs. While we of course cannot conclude that this correlation is driven by a causal effect of peers or neighborhood residents,
this result echoes Case and Katz’s (1991) finding that children’s outcomes are correlated with the
characteristics of the “company they keep.”
Traditional Proxies for Neighborhood Disadvantage. We find similar correlations between children’s outcomes and other socioeconomic characteristics that are commonly used as proxies for
neighborhood disadvantage, such as the share of residents above the poverty line (correlation =
0.537). Areas with higher mean household incomes, a larger share of college graduates, and higher
test scores also all tend to have higher levels of upward mobility (controlling for race) on average.
These results show that traditional proxies for neighborhood disadvantage do in fact predict upward
mobility, although they do not capture all of the variation.
39We also find no association between job growth and (1) the mean incomes of children with high-income (75th
percentile) parents across CZs or (2) upward mobility for children who stay in the same CZ as adults (who presumably
would be most likely to benefit from local growth).
26
Family Structure and Social Capital. Consistent with prior work on family structure and children’s outcomes (e.g., Sampson 1987), we find a strong negative correlation of -0.587 (s.e. 0.003)
between the fraction of single-parent households in a tract and upward mobility. Importantly,
this correlation remains similar even conditional on the marital status of a child’s own parents.
In particular, children of single parents have higher rates of upward mobility if they grow up in
a neighborhood with fewer single parent households (correlation = -0.52). This implies that the
correlation is driven not by differences in outcomes between children raised by married vs. single
parents, but rather by ecological (neighborhood-level) factors.
There is also a large literature documenting the role of social capital in shaping children’s
outcomes in adulthood. Measures of social capital are difficult to obtain at the tract level. However,
one proxy that is available at the tract level is the fraction of local residents who return their Census
forms by mail, an element of the widely used social capital index constructed by Rupasingha and
Goetz (2008). We construct this measure for each Census tract using publicly available data from
the 2016 Census Planning Database. Across tracts within CZs, we find a strong positive correlation
(0.375, s.e. 0.003) with upward mobility of low-income residents.
The Size of Neighborhoods. Throughout the preceding analysis, we used Census tracts as our
definition of “neighborhoods.” Is this the right scale of geography to focus on when we analyze
neighborhood characteristics? To answer this question, we regress upward mobility from white
children in a given tract c on poverty rates both in tract c and its ten nearest neighbors (based
on the distance between tract centroids). We focus on the 50 largest CZs by population for this
analysis to characterize the size of neighborhoods in large urban centers, but results are similar in
the full sample.40
Figure VIIa plots the coefficients obtained from running this regression. Both upward mobility
and poverty rates are standardized to have mean 0 and SD 1, so the coefficients that are plotted can
be interpreted as partial correlations. The explanatory power of poverty rates decays very rapidly
with distance. The coefficient on poverty rates in the child’s own tract is -0.32 (s.e. 0.012); the
coefficient on the next closest tract (which is on average 1 mile away) is -0.04 (s.e. 0.012). Summing
the coefficients on the ten nearest neighbors, we can infer that a 1 SD increase in poverty rates in
all ten of the nearest neighboring tracts (roughly a radius of about 3 miles) is associated with a
0.12 SD reduction in upward mobility for white children in a given tract, controlling for poverty
40We focus on white children here as a simple method of controlling for race; results are similar for black children
(Online Appendix Figure V) and when we pool all racial groups. The decay rates documented below are also similar
when we examine the other neighborhood characteristics in Figure V instead of poverty rates.
27
rates in that tract. Hence, poverty rates in one’s own tract matter 2.7 times more than those in
surrounding tracts for upward mobility.
In Figure VIIb, we replicate the analysis in Figure VIIa at the Census block level rather than
tract level to obtain a more precise picture of how the correlations decay with distance. To construct
this figure, we regress the household income rank of children whose parents are between the 20th
and 30th percentiles of the income distribution on block-level poverty rates for their own block and
the 200 nearest blocks, binned into groups of 5. Since block-level poverty rates are not publicly
available, we construct them using information from tax records as the share of families whose
total income falls below the poverty line in 2010.41 We find more gradual and smooth decay across
blocks than tracts, which is intuitive insofar as most plausible mechanisms that might underlie
these correlations – peer effects, differences in resources, or selection – would be unlikely to operate
purely at the own-block level. But the rate of decay is quite rapid with distance: the coefficients
remain statistically significant only until about the 40th nearest block, which is about 0.6 miles
away.
In sum, neighborhood characteristics matter at a hyperlocal level. A child’s immediate surroundings – within about half a mile – drive almost all of the association between children’s outcomes and neighborhood characteristics documented above.
Value of Outcome-Based Targeting Relative to Observables. To what extent do our measures
of children’s outcomes provide new information beyond what can be captured with existing crosssectional statistics on neighborhoods? Regressing upward mobility on the full set of characteristics
in Figure V yields a signal R-squared of 0.50. Half the variation in outcomes is captured in existing
measures, while half is not. Looking directly at outcomes is thus quite valuable if one seeks to
identify areas with the lowest level of upward mobility.
Perhaps more important, using outcomes directly eliminates the need to determine which predictors provide the most useful proxies for economic opportunity. The R-squared of 0.50 relies on
using the optimal (linear) combination of existing proxies to forecast outcomes. Alternative combinations that form the basis for existing indices for economic opportunity (e.g., Messer et al. 2006
Acevedo-Garcia et al. 2014, Opportunity-Nation 2017) have correlations with our outcome-based
measures that range from 0 to 0.6, depending upon the exact set of variables and weights that are
used.
41When constructed at the tract level, these poverty rates are highly correlated (correlation = 0.80) with publicly
available poverty rates from the Census. In addition, using an estimation approach at the tract level analogous to
what we use at the block level yields results very similar to those in Figure VIIa.
28
The fact that we do not need to rely on a specific model relating neighborhood characteristics
to outcomes is especially valuable because the relationship between neighborhood characteristics
and children’s outcomes itself varies across areas. To illustrate this point, consider the following
question: Do cities have higher rates of upward mobility? On average, there is a small negative
correlation between upward mobility and population density across tracts within CZs (correlation
= -0.233, s.e. 0.004), as shown in the last row of Figure V.42 But, this aggregate relationship masks
considerable heterogeneity across the country. Figure VIIIa maps upward mobility by tract for
white children in North Carolina. This map is predominantly red, with blips of blue around urban
centers, showing that cities have higher rates of upward mobility than rural areas in North Carolina
(correlation with population density = 0.22, s.e. 0.027). In contrast, Figure VIIIb shows that the
pattern is reversed in Iowa: rural areas have higher rates of upward mobility for whites than urban
areas (correlation = -0.59, s.e. 0.037). Figure VIIIc plots the correlation between upward mobility
for whites and population density for each of the fifty states. In the southeast, rural areas tend to
have lower rates of upward mobility than urban areas. In contrast, in the midwest and mountain
west, rural areas tend to have significantly higher rates of upward mobility than urban areas.
The heterogeneity in the association between population density and upward mobility illustrates
the benefit of directly using data on outcomes for targeting policies.43 Rather than attempting to
draw general conclusions about whether cities offer better opportunities for upward mobility based
on observable characteristics, one can directly study outcomes in the area of interest and target
policies accordingly.
IV.D Changes Over Time
Although the upward mobility measures add information relative to neighborhood characteristics
in predicting children’s outcomes historically, these measures come with a lag because one must
wait until children grow up to see their earnings. Are the estimates of upward mobility in the
Opportunity Atlas – which are based on children who grew up in the 1980s and 1990s – useful for
targeting policies to improve outcomes for children growing up in the same areas today?
Because rates of upward mobility for children growing up today are unobservable, we conceptualize this problem as a prediction exercise. How well can we predict upward mobility for birth
cohort t (¯yc,t) in tract c using historical estimates of upward mobility for birth cohort t−j (ˆyc,t−j )?
42We find a correlation of -0.236 (s.e. 0.005) for upward mobility for whites.
43We find spatial heterogeneity in the association between upward mobility and the other characteristics analyzed
in Figure V as well, but the differences are most stark for population density.
29
Focusing on linear predictors,
y¯c,t = α + βjy¯c,t−j + εcjt, (4)
the optimal weight placed on the historical estimate for tract c is given by the standard formula
for the regression coefficient:
βj =
Cov (¯yc,t, yˆc,t−j )
V ar (ˆyc,t−j )
. (5)
We analyze how the coefficients βj decay over time by estimating upward mobility ˆyc,t−j separately
by single birth cohort (pooling racial groups) and running the regression in (4). To identify as
many lags as possible, we extend our primary analysis sample to children born in the 1978-89 birth
cohorts and measure children’s income ranks at age 26, the earliest at age at which we can obtain
reliable estimates of permanent income ranks Chetty and Hendren (2018b).
Figure IXa plots βj/β1 – the optimal weight with estimates that have a j year lag relative to the
optimal weight placed on an estimate that is one year old. There is very little decay in predictive
power across cohorts. The optimal weight placed on an outcome observed 10 years ago is only
11% smaller than the weight placed on an outcome observed in the previous year. The decay in
the predictive power of historical upward mobility measures remains small even when we focus on
tracts that changed the most in terms of observable characteristics such as poverty rates. When
we focus on tracts that had the largest absolute changes in poverty rates between 1990 and 2000
(where poverty rates increased or decreased by at least 10%), β11/β1 = 87% (as shown by the series
in diamonds in Figure IXa).
We would ideally extend the series in Figure IXa beyond j = 11 to determine whether our
baseline estimates for the 1978-83 birth cohorts are relevant for children growing up today, but our
data do not extend sufficiently far to do this. As a feasible alternative, we study how the tract-level
neighborhood characteristics that are most predictive of upward mobility evolve over time. Figure
IXb replicates Figure IXa using poverty rates by tract instead of upward mobility. We measure
poverty rates using publicly available data from the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Census and ACS data
collected between 2006 and 2010 and between 2011 and 2015, which we pool to obtain estimates
for 2008 and 2013, respectively. We obtain estimates at j ∈ {5, 8, 10, 13, 18, 23} by combining these
datasets. Similar to Figure IXa, we observe relatively little decay: poverty rates 23 years ago are
91% as predictive of current poverty rates in a neighborhood as poverty rates five years ago. Since
half of the variance in upward mobility is predicted by neighborhood characteristics such as poverty
rates, this finding suggests that upward mobility is likely to be fairly stable over longer horizons as
30
well – presumably because the underlying structural factors associated with differences in upward
mobility across areas themselves change slowly over time.
Based on these analyses, we conclude that the historical measures of upward mobility we are
able to construct remain useful (albeit imperfect) predictors of upward mobility for current cohorts.
IV.E Illustrative Applications
Having shown that tract-level measures of upward mobility can provide useful new information for
targeting policies toward areas with poor opportunities, we conclude by illustrating how using these
new measures would change the neighborhoods one targets in the policy applications discussed at
the beginning of this section.
First consider the Opportunity Zones program, whose goal is to provide preferential tax treatment for investment in selected “low opportunity” neighborhoods. Online Appendix Figure VIa
outlines the tracts that were designated as Opportunity Zones in Los Angeles county. Online Appendix Figure VIb shows the neighborhoods that would hypothetically be selected if one were to
choose the same number of tracts, selecting those with the lowest levels of upward mobility.44 The
neighborhoods change quite substantially, with more neighborhoods in the center of the city selected
by targeting the lowest-mobility tracts. Children who grew up in low-income (25th percentile) families in neighborhoods that are currently designated as Opportunity Zones in Los Angeles county
earn about $31,000 on average in adulthood; under the hypothetical designation, this figure would
be $26,000. Hence, the upward mobility estimates would allow us to better identify the neighborhoods that truly offer children the poorest prospects, if that were one’s objective.
As a second example, consider admissions to Chicago’s selective public high schools, in which
preference is granted to students from particularly disadvantaged neighborhoods. Online Appendix
Figure VIIa shows “Tier 1” tracts in 2017 – areas that were identified as the most disadvantaged
and received the strongest admissions preferences. Online Appendix Figure VIIb shows the neighborhoods that would be selected based on upward-mobility targeting. Again, we see a significant
shift, in particular with more tracts on the far South Side of the city – areas that do not have
particularly high poverty rates (and hence are not included under the current designation) yet have
low observed rates of upward mobility.
Of course, these results should not be interpreted as a normative prescription that one should
44Adjusting for tract-level noise by shrinking towards the county mean does not significantly affect the tracts
assigned to Opportunity Zones; 93% of tracts assigned to these zones using the raw estimates are also assigned
when using the shrunk estimates. The Spearman correlation between the shrunk and the unshrunk upward mobility
estimates is 0.99.
31
target different areas in these programs. Policies may be targeted with many potential objectives in
mind, of which upward mobility might be one element. Our point here is simply that if one wanted
to target areas with limited opportunities for upward mobility, the new statistics constructed here
could meaningfully change one’s choices.
V Causal Effects and Neighborhood Choice
The neighborhood-level variation in outcomes documented above could be driven by two different
sources. One possibility is that neighborhoods have causal effects on children’s outcomes: that
is, moving a given child to a different neighborhood would change his or her outcomes. Another
possibility is that the variation is due to differences in the types of people living in each neighborhood. Distinguishing between these two explanations is important to understand whether the
observational estimates in the Opportunity Atlas are useful for families choosing where to live and
for the design of policies such as housing vouchers that seek to help families move to opportunity.
In this section, we analyze the extent to which our observational estimates of upward mobility
reflect causal effects of place vs. selection. To define the estimand of interest, consider a hypothetical experiment in which a new group of children are randomly assigned to grow up in different
neighborhoods at birth. Let yi denote child i’s income rank in adulthood and ¯ycp denote the mean
income rank in adulthood for children raised from birth in tract c at parental income rank p in
the observational data. Our goal is to identify the coefficient λ in a regression of outcomes in the
experimental sample on the observational predictions:
yi = α + λy¯c(i),p(i) + ηi
. (6)
Since children’s potential outcomes are orthogonal to ¯yc(i),p(i)
in the experimental sample, the
parameter λ represents the average causal effect of growing up in a neighborhood where observed
ranks are 1 percentile higher. Furthermore, under the assumption that the causal and selection
components of ¯ycp are additive and uncorrelated, λ can be interpreted as the fraction of the variance
in ¯ycp that is due to the causal effects of place.45
45To see this formally, suppose that child i’s outcome yi = µc(i),p(i) + θi, where µcp denotes the causal effect of
growing up in tract c given parents at percentile p and θi denotes a selection term that reflects family inputs or other
factors unrelated to where a child grows up. In the observational sample, the mean selection effect ¯θcp = E[θi|c, p] can
vary across tracts; in the experimental sample, ¯θcp does not vary across tracts by construction. If Cov(
¯θcp, µcp) = 0
in the observational sample – i.e., if the selection and causal components are uncorrelated across tracts – then
λ = Cov(yi, y¯cp)/V ar(¯ycp) = V ar(µcp)/V ar(¯ycp), the fraction of the variation in ¯ycp that is due to causal effects. If
¯θcp is correlated with µcp, λ includes this additional covariance and cannot be directly interpreted as the variance
share of causal effects. However, even in this case we can still test the null hypothesis that there are no causal effects
by estimating λ, since λ > 0 ⇔ V ar(µcp) > 0.
32
We estimate λ using two research designs. First, we compare our observational estimates
from the Opportunity Atlas with the experimental treatment effects for children who moved to
different neighborhoods in the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) Experiment. Second, we use the
quasi-experimental design of Chetty and Hendren (2018a) to estimate causal effects by comparing
the outcomes of children who move across tracts at different ages. In the final subsection, we use
our estimates to study how opportunity for children is priced in the housing market and discuss
implications for the design of affordable housing policies.
V.A Comparison to Estimates from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment
We begin by summarizing the design of the MTO experiment; see Sanbonmatsu et al. (2011) and
Chetty et al. (2016) (hereafter CHK) for a more comprehensive description. The MTO experiment
enrolled 4,604 low-income families living in high-poverty public housing projects in five U.S. cities
– Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York – from 1994 to 1998. These families
were randomized into three groups: 1) the experimental group, which received housing vouchers
that subsidized private-market rents and could only be used in census tracts with 1990 poverty
rates below 10%; 2) the Section 8 group, which received regular housing vouchers without any
constraints; and 3) a control group, which received no assistance through MTO but retained the
option to stay in public housing. Families in all three groups were required to contribute 30% of
their annual household income toward rent and utilities. Families remained eligible for vouchers
(or public housing) indefinitely as long their income was below 50 percent of the median income in
their metro area.
Using data from tax records, CHK show that children who were assigned at young ages (below
age 13) to the Experimental and Section 8 groups earned significantly more in adulthood than
their peers in the control group.46 Here, we use Chetty et al.’s experimental estimates for children
who were below age 13 at the point of random assignment to estimate λ, by regressing the MTO
experimental estimates on the observational predictions:
yˆ
MT O
ws = αs + λyˆws + εws. (7)
In this specification, ˆyMT O
ws denotes mean individual earnings for children below age 13 at random
assignment in site s and treatment arm w in the MTO experiment, while ˆyws denotes the mean
46Treatment effects for children who moved at older ages (above age 13) and adults were not significant, suggesting
that the duration of exposure to a better environment during childhood is a key determinant of an individual’s
long-term outcomes. Here, we focus exclusively on the estimates for young children.
33
observed level of individual earnings from the Opportunity Atlas in the tracts where children in
site s and and treatment arm w lived. We include site fixed effects αs in (7) because children were
randomly assigned to different groups only within sites.
To implement (7), we construct the estimates of ˆyMT O
ws from the intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates
on individual earnings reported for each site by CHK (Appendix Table 7, Panel B). To adjust
for the fact that not all families who were offered vouchers took them up and moved, we follow
CHK and construct treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimates for the Section 8 and Experimental
groups as the mean observed earnings for the control group in the relevant site plus the site-specific
ITT estimate for each treatment arm divided by the voucher takeup rate in that arm.
We construct the corresponding observational predictions ˆyws in three steps. First, we construct observational predictions of mean individual income ranks for children with parents at the
10th percentile, roughly the median income level of MTO participants (Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011),
following the methodology in Section III.47 Second, we translate the percentile rank predictions
to dollar values at age 26 – the median age at which CHK measure young children’s incomes in
adulthood in the MTO analysis – using a crosswalk from ranks to dollars at age 26. Finally, we
take the neighborhoods reported as the most common locations for children in MTO from Appendix Table 1c of CHK and map these neighborhoods to Census tracts. We then calculate the
average predicted individual income across these tracts, weighting by the number of children from
below-median income families in each tract in the 2000 Census, to arrive at ˆyws.
Figure X presents a scatter plot of ˆyMT O
ws vs. ˆyws. There are 15 points, representing each of
the three treatment arms in the five sites. Solid circles represent the control group, while hollow
triangles and solid diamonds represent the Section 8 voucher and Experimental voucher groups,
respectively. To eliminate variation across sites, we demean both ˆyMT O
ws and ˆyws within site and
add back the values of ˆyMT O
ws and ˆyws for the control group in Chicago to facilitate interpretation
of the scale.
There is a clear positive relationship between the actual outcomes of children in the MTO
experiment and the Opportunity Atlas observational predictions. The correlation coefficient is
0.60. The slope of the regression line is λˆ = 0.71 (s.e. 0.26): moving to an area where children in
low-income (10 percentile) families earn $1,000 more in the observational data increases children’s
earnings by $710. This estimate suggests that around 70% of the variation in observational estimates
47We do not use race- and gender-specific predictions because CHK do not report site-specific treatment effects by
race and gender, due to small sample sizes.
34
of upward mobility across rates is due to causal effects rather than sorting.48
V.B Quasi-Experimental Estimates of Causal Effects
The MTO-based estimate of λ above uses data from a small set of neighborhoods in five selected
cities. To estimate the causal share λ in a broader set of neighborhoods, we turn to a second
approach that builds on the quasi-experimental research design of Chetty and Hendren (2018a)
and uses data from all tracts in the U.S. Chetty and Hendren study how the outcomes of children
who move across CZs vary with the age at which they move to identify the causal effects of CZs;
here, we use the same design to identify the causal effects of Census tracts, which could potentially
be very different since selection patterns across tracts within CZs could differ from selection patterns
across CZs.
Since our approach closely follows Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we briefly summarize the
estimation approach in what follows; further details regarding the sample specification, variable
definitions, and estimation equations are in Online Appendix C.
Empirical Specification. We study the outcomes of children who move across tracts exactly
once before age 30 during our sample window. We extend our primary sample to the 1978-91 birth
cohorts for this analysis to maximize the set of ages at which we see children moving.
Let i index children and pi denote their parental income ranks. In the sample of one-time
movers, let mi denote the age at which child i moves from origin tract o to destination tract d. Let
yˆcp denote the exposure-weighted mean of yi for children who grew up in location c with parental
household income rank p, estimated using the approach in Section III except using only children
who never move or who move more than one time (i.e., the complement to one-time movers).49 Let
∆odp = ˆydp − yˆop denote the predicted difference in income ranks in the destination versus origin
tract for children.
We regress the income rank of children who move (yi) on the measures of origin and destination
quality and parental income rank, fully interacted with age-at-move fixed effects:
48This estimate should be interpreted as a rough approximation of λ for several reasons. First, we use data on
the most common initial neighborhoods to which MTO participants moved (from Appendix Table Ic of CHK) to
estimate ˆyws rather than the exact locations where MTO children grew up throughout their childhood. Second,
children moved on average at age 8 in the MTO sample of young children analyzed by CHK; children who move at
birth might experience larger treatment effects. Third, because our estimates of ˆyws themselves contain estimation
error, λˆMT O slightly understates the fraction of the variance in the conditional expectation ¯ycp due to the causal
effects of place. Given the reliability estimate of about 0.9 in Table II, the third source of bias leads us to understate
λ by about 10%. Quantifying the magnitude and sign of potential bias from the first two issues is more challenging,
but we expect that these sources of error are likely to be smaller than the uncertainty in λˆMT O due to sampling error.
49We do not include one-time movers when constructing these exposure-weighted outcomes to ensure that a child’s
own outcome does not enter our definition of neighborhood quality.
35
yi =
X
28
m=2
I(mi = m) [αm + φmyˆop + ζmpi + bm∆odp] + εi (8)
where αm denotes an age-at-move-specific intercept and the parameters {φm, ζm} are age-specific
coefficients on the predicted income rank in the origin and on parental income rank, respectively. To
adjust for attenuation bias due to measurement error in our estimates of ˆycp, we construct independent estimates ˆycp,1 and ˆycp,2 by randomly splitting families into two samples and then instrument
for ˆyop,1 with ˆyop,2 and ∆odp,1 with ∆odp,2 when estimating (8).50 Throughout our analysis, we
restrict to moves between tracts that are at least 25 miles apart; we show in Online Appendix C
that shorter-distance moves often reflect measurement error in location induced by returns to areas
where a child previously lived, especially in single-parent families, creating attenuation bias in the
estimates.
The key parameters of interest in (8) are the bm coefficients, which capture how children’s
outcomes vary with the age at which they move to an area with higher or lower predicted earnings
in the observational data. We can interpret differences in the coefficients bm, e.g. bm − bm+1, as
the causal effect of exposure to a better area (i.e., an area with higher observed incomes) under
the assumption that the potential outcomes of children who move to better vs. worse areas do not
vary with the age at which they move. We first present a set of baseline estimates and then present
a series of tests to validate this orthogonality condition.
Baseline Results. Figure XI plots the coefficients {bm} for the specification in equation 8 using
household income ranks at age 24 as the outcome.51 Consistent with the results in Chetty and
Hendren (2018a) at the CZ level, the coefficients bm decline steadily until age 23, after which they
are flat at an average level of δ = 0.35. Since moves after age 24 cannot affect income measured
at age 24, this δ coefficient reflects selection: children whose parents move to areas with better
observed outcomes tend be positively selected in terms of their potential earnings.52
Under our identification assumption that the selection effect δ does not vary with the age at
which children move (illustrated by the dashed horizontal line in Figure XI), we can interpret
the difference between bm and δ as the causal effect of moving to an area with one percentile
50The degree of noise relative to signal is amplified in (8) because we identify purely from residual variation in
∆odp, controlling for origin neighborhood quality. This is why adjusting for noise is particularly important in this
analysis.
51We measure income at age 24 to maximize the range of ages at move that we are able to analyze. Measuring
income at later ages yields similar results, as shown in Chetty and Hendren (2018a).
52This selection term is higher than the corresponding estimate of δ = 0.22 the CZ level (Chetty and Hendren
2018, Figure IV), suggesting that there is indeed more unobservable selection across tracts than across CZs.
36
higher predicted income ranks at age m. The declining pattern of the coefficients implies that
neighborhoods have causal effects on children’s outcomes in proportion to childhood exposure prior
to age 23. The slope of this relationship is somewhat steeper between ages 13 and 23 than it is at
earlier ages, suggesting that where a child lives as an adolescent may be particularly influential in
determining his earnings outcomes, consistent with the findings of Deutscher (2018) in Australian
data.
Fitting a linear regression to the estimates below age 23, we estimate an average annual childhood exposure effect – the effect of growing up for an additional year in a tract with 1 percentile
higher observed earnings – of γ = 0.025 (s.e. 0.002). Extrapolating linearly back to age 0, we
obtain a predicted value of b0 = 0.92, implying that the causal effect of moving at birth to an area
with 1 percentile higher observed earnings is λ = 0.92−0.35 = 0.57. Hence, under the identification
assumption underlying this research design, 57% of the variation in the observational estimates is
due to the causal effect of neighborhoods.
In the rest of this subsection, we evaluate the robustness of this estimate and the identification
assumptions underlying its interpretation as a causal effect using variants of the specification above.
For simplicity, we parameterize the age-specific effects plotted in Figure XI using a two-piece linear
spline, permitting different slopes above and below age 23, by estimating regressions of the following
form:
yi =
X
28
m=2
I(mi = m) [αm + φmy¯op + ζmpi
] + I(mi ≤ 23)(γ
0 + γmi)∆odp
+I(mi > 23)(ρ
0 + ρmi)∆odp + εi (9)
Here, the coefficient of interest is γ, the annual childhood exposure effect, which is the average
effect of moving to a tract with 1 percentile higher observed income ranks one year earlier, at or
before age 23. The coefficient ρ measures the corresponding slope for moves after age 23.
Column 1 of Table IV presents estimates of γ and ρ using (9). Consistent with the nonparametric estimate in Figure XI, we obtain an estimate of γ = 0.027, implying that 23 × 0.027 =
62% of the variation in observational estimates can be attributed to the causal effect of neighborhoods. Column 2 presents estimates from a more parsimonious specification that eliminates the
interactions between age-of-move dummies and origin place quality ¯yop, effectively constraining the
coefficient on ¯yop to be constant across ages. The coefficients are again very similar. Columns 3 and
4 replicate Column 1, replacing household income with an indicator for being married at age 30
37
(Column 3) and for being incarcerated on April 1, 2010 (Column 4).53 We obtain similar estimates
of childhood exposure effects – with a convergence rate of approximately 2.5% per year of exposure
to the mean outcomes observed in the destination – for these outcomes as well.
Validation of Identification Assumption. The preceding analysis rests on the assumption that
the potential outcomes of children who move to better or worse neighborhoods do not systematically
vary with age of move. We evaluate the validity of this assumption using two approaches, following
Chetty and Hendren (2018a). First, in Column 5 of Table IV, we add family fixed effects to the
specification in Column 1. This approach identifies exposure effects from comparisons between
siblings, by asking whether the difference in earnings outcomes between two siblings who move
to a new area is proportional to their age difference interacted with observed outcomes in the
destination. The coefficients in Column 5 are very similar to those in Column 1.
These sibling comparisons address confounds due to factors that are fixed within families, but
they do not account for time-varying factors, such as a change in family environment at the time
of the move (e.g., a new job) that directly affects children in proportion to exposure time independent of neighborhoods. To evaluate whether such unobservables might bias our estimates, we turn
to a second test of our identification assumption: outcome-based placebo tests. These tests are
motivated by the finding in Section IV.B that neighborhoods are multi-dimensional: incomes, incarceration rates, teenage birth rates, and other outcomes are not perfectly correlated across tracts.
Under the causal exposure effect model, the incomes of children who move between neighborhoods
should be predicted by the difference in observed incomes rather than by differences in other outcomes, such as incarceration rates. In contrast, it is less plausible that time-varying unobservables
(such as a new job) would happen to perfectly replicate the entire distribution of outcomes in each
area in proportion to exposure time.
We implement these placebo tests in Table V. We start from the parsimonious specification in
Column 2 of Table IV and include not only ¯yop and ∆odp as regressors, but also analogous tract-level
predictions of marriage rates at age 30, as well as incarceration rates in 2010 (for men) and teenage
birth rates (for women), each interacted with age.54 In Column 1, we use children’s income ranks
at age 24 as the dependent variable, as in Table IV Column 2. For both men (in Panel A) and
women (in Panel B), the coefficient measuring the exposure effects to neighborhoods based on the
53Note that we replace not only the left-hand side variable but also the neighborhood-specific predictions with
these alternative outcome measures.
54We use the more parsimonious specification to eliminate the multiple sets of interactions, which reduce power;
results are qualitatively similar though noisier with using specification in Column 1 of Table IV.
38
income predictions remains similar to that in our baseline specification. However, moving to an area
with higher incarceration rates (for men), teenage birth rates (for women), or marriage rates has no
impact on children’s incomes, conditional on observed incomes in the destination. Column 2 repeats
this exercise with marriage as the dependent variable; Columns 3 and 4 do so with incarceration and
teenage birth (respectively). In each case, the neighborhood quality measure based on predictions
of the dependent variable is strongly significant with a coefficient of similar magnitude to those
reported in Table IV, but the coefficients on the other “placebo” predictions are small and typically
statistically insignificant. This evidence strongly supports the view that the variation in children’s
outcomes across neighborhoods for movers is driven by causal effects. Intuitively, it is unlikely that
a correlated shock - such as an increase in wages when the family moves - would covary precisely
with differences in neighborhood quality across all of these outcomes.55
Heterogeneity Analysis. Having established the validity of the research design and the robustness
of our estimates in the full sample, we now study whether the fraction of the observational variation
that is due to causal effects (λ) varies across subsamples of the data. As a reference, we begin by
replicating our baseline specification from equation (9) in Column 1 of Table VI.
One concern with these estimates is that they are identified from the set of families who choose
to move to a given area, and hence may capture causal effects that apply only to the particular
families who chose to move to a neighborhood that is good for their children, rather than a broader
population. For example, our estimates of λ might not have external validity to other families who
may be induced to move by other factors, such as changes in housing policies. In the presence of such
selection on heterogeneous treatment effects, we would expect moves to better areas (∆odp > 0) to
produce larger exposure effects in absolute value than moves to worse areas (∆odp < 0). Intuitively,
in this scenario, children moving to better neighborhoods would gain even more than we predict
based on average earnings, while those moving to worse neighborhoods would suffer less relative
to the observational predictions. We test whether this is the case in Column 2 of Table VI by
replicating the specification in Column 1, allowing for separate exposure effects for moves to better
places (where ∆odp > 0) and moves to worse places. We find completely symmetric effects of moves
to better vs. worse places, suggesting that there is relatively little heterogeneity in treatment
effects, at least based on observed patterns of selection.
55Formally, this test relies on the assumption that if unobservables θi are correlated with exposure to neighborhood
quality as measured by a specific outcome variable y, they must also be correlated with neighborhood quality as
measured by another outcome variable y
0
(conditional on control variables). See Chetty and Hendren (2018a) for
further details.
39
Column 3 replicates Column 1 for the subset of families who make large moves, defined as
moves either from the top decile of neighborhoods in terms of ˆyc,p=25 to the bottom decile or vice
versa. Once again, the estimates are very similar, suggesting that roughly 60% of the differences
in observed outcomes reflect causal effects even in the tails of the distribution. Columns 4 and 5
of Table VI test whether the component of children’s incomes that is predictable by median rents
and the observable characteristics analyzed in Figure V above have the same causal content as
the “unobservable” component of the variation in observed outcomes. In Column 4, we use the
predicted values of ˆyop and ˆydp based on observables to construct the key right-hand-side regressors
in (9); in Column 5, we conversely use the residuals from the regressions on observables. We find
that the estimated exposure effects are nearly identical between these two components, allaying
the concern that the “unobserved” portion of the variation in children’s outcomes across areas
predominantly reflects selection.56
Granularity of Causal Effects. Finally, we use the movers design to revisit the analysis on
the geographic scale of neighborhoods in Section IV.C, examining whether neighborhoods’ causal
effects also operate at a fine geographic scale. Figure XII plots estimates from a regression that
replaces ˆyop and ˆydp in the parsimonious specification used in Column 2 of Table IV with poverty
rates in the origin and destination tracts along with symmetric interactions between age at move
and poverty rates in the ten tracts that are closest to the actual origin and destination tracts,
respectively. We plot the eleven coefficients on the interactions between the destination-origin
difference in poverty rates and age at move (for moves below age 23). These coefficients can be
interpreted as the causal childhood exposure effect of moving to a tract (or near a tract) that has 1
SD higher poverty rates. Moving to a higher poverty tract earlier in childhood significantly reduces
a child’s earnings. However, moving to an area where surrounding tracts have higher poverty
rates (controlling for poverty rates in one’s own tract) has essentially no impact on children’s
outcomes. This figure replicates the correlational finding in Figure V, showing that neighborhood
characteristics are predictive not just of sorting patterns at a hyperlocal level but of causal effects.57
We conclude based on this quasi-experimental analysis that λ ' 62% of the observational
variation in outcomes across Census tracts reflects the causal effects of neighborhoods, and that
56We also find little heterogeneity in the exposure effects by the racial composition of the neighborhood to which
children move. For example, black children who move to neighborhoods with a higher value of ˆydp at younger ages
experience similar gains irrespective of whether the black share in the destination neighborhood is small or large.
57We find a similar pattern when using children’s mean observed outcomes or other covariates as regressors instead
of poverty rates: in all cases, what matters are observed outcomes and characteristics in one’s own tract, not nearby
tracts.
40
this fraction is quite stable across subsamples. Combining this estimate of λ with the signal SD
of individual income across tracts within counties for children with parents at the 25th percentile
($2,737), we estimate that moving at birth from a neighborhood at the 25th percentile of the
distribution of upward mobility within one’s county to a neighborhood at the 75th percentile would
increase the lifetime undiscounted earnings of a child growing up in a low-income family by $198,348
(or $52,020 in present value at birth).58 This earnings gain would benefit not just the children who
move but taxpayers as well, through increased tax revenue and lower incarceration rates. These
gains could be substantial; for example, assuming a tax rate of 20%, tax revenue would increase by
$39,670 over the course of a child’s lifetime.
V.C The Price of Opportunity
The finding that a large fraction of the variation in the observational estimates of upward mobility is
driven by causal effects of place suggests that many families can potentially “move to opportunity,”
i.e. improve their children’s prospects by changing where they live. The feasibility of such moves,
however, relies on being able to find affordable housing in such areas. In this subsection, we study
the relationship between our observational estimates of upward mobility and rents to understand
how opportunity is priced in spatial equilibrium and whether low-income families are likely to be
able to move to opportunity.
Figure XIIIa plots upward mobility vs. the median rent for two-bedroom apartments in 1990
(measured in 2015 $) for tracts in the city of Chicago. On the one hand, upward mobility is
clearly correlated with rent, showing that this neighborhood amenity is priced in equilibrium on
average. On the other hand, there is considerable residual variation in upward mobility conditional
on median rent. For example, both Hyde Park and Alsip had median rents of about $1,000 per
month in 1990. Yet children who grow up in low-income families in Hyde Park reach only the
24th percentile of the income distribution on average, while those in Alsip instead reach the 47th
percentile, roughly $24,000 higher in the income distribution. More broadly, across the United
States, the within-CZ signal correlation between rent and upward mobility in 0.44. The residual
58We estimate this impact by first tabulating mean individual earnings by age in the publicly available 2015 ACS
across all ages. We then apply a 1% wage growth rate and mortality rate estimates from Chetty et al. (2016) to
obtain an undiscounted sum of lifetime earnings for the average American of $2.70 million. Assuming that the gain
in earnings from growing up in a better neighborhood remains constant in percentage terms over the lifecycle, the
estimated impact on undiscounted lifetime earnings is 0.62 Ö 0.12 Ö $2.70m = $198,000. Assuming a 0.5% wage
growth rate would give an undiscounted lifetime earnings impact of $156,619, while a 1.5% rate would give $252,585.
To obtain the present values at birth, we apply a 3% annual discount rate to this profile to obtain a PDV at age 0
of $709,049 and repeat the preceding calculations.
41
SD of upward mobility controlling for median rent is 4.66 percentiles ($5,010). In general, there
appears to be considerable scope to find higher-mobility areas without paying a higher level of rent.
Heterogeneity in the Price of Opportunity. In some CZs, rent covaries much more strongly with
upward mobility – i.e., opportunity is priced more steeply. To demonstrate this, we quantify the
average price of upward mobility in each CZ by first regressing median annual rents on our estimates
of upward mobility across tracts within each CZ, weighting by number of children from belowmedian income families in the tract. We then inflate this regression coefficient by the reliability of
our upward mobility estimate in that CZ to adjust for noise. Finally, we translate the estimates in
ranks to dollars as above to obtain an estimate that can be interpreted as the average annual rental
cost of a $1 increase in future annual income for children with parents at the 25th percentile.
Across all CZs, the average population-weighted “price of opportunity” is 0.194 – that is, a
$1,000 increase in future annual income for children costs an additional $190 in annual rent for
each year of their childhood. However, the standard deviation of these estimates across CZs is
0.121, showing that there is considerable dispersion in the price of opportunity. What kinds of CZs
have a steeper price of opportunity? One key predictor is the extent of land-use regulations, which
have been widely studied in prior work on the cost of housing. Figure XIIIb plots the price of
predicted outcomes against the Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulatory Index (Gyourko et al.
2008). The price of opportunity is substantially higher in cities with tighter land use regulations
variables, with a correlation of 0.55. In lightly regulated cities, such as Wichita, KS, the price of
predicted outcomes is just 0.047 dollars in annual rent for a $1 increase in future annual income;
in highly regulated cities, such as Boston, MA, or Baltimore, MD, the price is five times higher, at
approximately 0.26.
Why is Upward Mobility Not Fully Priced? Why is the variation in upward mobility not fully
priced in the housing market in spatial equilibrium? One possibility is that high-mobility, lowrent tracts have other disamenities, such as longer commute times. In practice, controlling for
average commute times (in addition to median rent) reduces the residual signal variation in upward
mobility very little (Figure XIIIc), but other unobservable neighborhood characteristics could of
course matter more.
An alternative possibility is that frictions in the housing market may prevent households – especially low-income households – from moving to high-upward-mobility neighborhoods. For instance,
households may face discrimination, lack information, or may move under duress in a way that
limits their available options (DeLuca et al. 2019; Christensen and Timmins 2019; Bergman et al.
42
2019). We find some support for the existence of informational frictions by splitting the variation
in upward mobility into the component that is predicted by the observable neighborhood characteristics analyzed in Figure V (such as poverty rates and test scores) and a residual (“unobservable”)
component. The observable component has a correlation of 0.47 with rent, while the unobservable
component has a signal correlation of only 0.03 with rent (Figure XIIId). This finding suggests
that upward mobility may not be fully priced in equilibrium partly because families are unaware
that certain areas are “opportunity bargains.”
V.D Illustrative Application
Having shown that our tract-level measures of upward mobility largely reflect causal effects of
neighborhoods and vary substantially even conditional on the cost of housing, we conclude by
illustrating how these estimates can be applied in the design of affordable housing policies. We
return to the MTO experiment and ask the following question: if the experimental vouchers had
targeted “opportunity bargain” areas – equally affordable neighborhoods with the highest levels of
upward mobility – rather than those with the lowest poverty rates, how would children’s incomes
have changed?
We begin by identifying “opportunity bargain” neighborhoods that could have been targeted in
the MTO experiment. To do so, we first count the number of tracts that would have been available
to experimental voucher holders in the MTO experiment based on the official requirement that the
poverty rate should be less than 10% in the 1990 census, which we denote by Nc. Then, we identify
the Nc highest ranking tracts in terms of upward mobility that have both lower median rents than
the areas to which MTO voucher holders moved and shorter commute times using public transport
to the tracts where control group residents lived (see the notes to Figure XIV for details).59 Online
Appendix Figure VII illustrates some of the areas identified as opportunity bargains in Chicago,
which include Uptown (North of the Loop) and Alsip/Marrionette and Evergreen (Southwest of
downtown).
Once we have identified the set of opportunity bargain tracts in each city, we compute average
individual earnings in adulthood across the relevant Census tracts using our observational estimates,
conditional on having parents at the 10th percentile of the income distribution. Figure XIV uses
these estimates to predict the earnings children in the MTO experiment would have had if they
had moved to these opportunity bargain tracts. It replicates Figure X, but adds five points (in
59We obtain similar results if we further restrict attention to opportunity bargain areas with high rates of racial
diversity (Online Appendix Figure IX).
43
open circles) that show the observational estimates of income on the x -axis and predicted values
for (hypothetical) movers in the MTO sample corresponding to those estimates. These predictions
are linear extrapolations using the regression line estimated using the actual MTO experimental
estimates, which is shown by the solid line in the figure.
On average, across the five MTO sites, we predict that children’s individual earnings would
have been $3,800 higher had they moved to opportunity bargain areas instead of the areas to
which experimental voucher holders moved. For comparison, the mean earnings gain (relative
to the control group) that was actually realized by children in the experimental voucher group
who moved to low-poverty neighborhoods was $3,500 – implying that one could have achieved
double the earnings gains by defining “high opportunity” areas using the new tract-level data on
upward mobility. These findings suggest that one could improve children’s outcomes substantially
without increasing expenditure on housing vouchers by helping families use their vouchers move to
opportunity bargain areas if they wish to do so. More broadly, this example underscores the value
of using data on children’s outcomes rather than traditional proxies for neighborhood quality in
policy design.
VI Conclusion
Cross-sectional statistics on neighborhood characteristics such as poverty rates and job growth have
provided a foundation for economic policy and research on labor markets for several decades. In this
paper, we have constructed longitudinal statistics that measure children’s outcomes in adulthood
based on the Census tract in which they grew up, which can provide an analogous foundation for
policies to improve social mobility and research on human capital development.
Using these new statistics, we show that neighborhoods have substantial causal effects on children’s long-term outcomes at a granular level. Moving to a neighborhood that is just a few miles
away can change children’s average earnings by several thousand dollars a year and have significant
effects on a spectrum of other outcomes ranging from incarceration to teenage birth rates. Much
of this variation in children’s outcomes is unrelated to traditional neighborhood-level proxies for
economic success – such as rates of job and wage growth – showing that the conditions that create
greater upward mobility are not the same as those that lead to productive labor markets.
Going forward, there are many potential applications of the Opportunity Atlas for both policy
and research. Policy makers can use these data to better design programs to improve economic
opportunities for disadvantaged children. For example, the Creating Moves to Opportunity pilot
44
program conducted by the Seattle and King County housing authorities helps housing voucher
recipients move to higher-opportunity areas based on the Opportunity Atlas statistics (Bergman
et al. 2019); a recent bill proposes to scale that approach nationally. Other proposals seek to expand
affordable housing, change zoning restrictions, and invest in community redevelopment using the
Opportunity Atlas statistics as an input.
For researchers, the Opportunity Atlas provides a tool to study the determinants of economic
opportunity. For example, recent studies have used the Opportunity Atlas data to analyze the
effects of lead exposure, pollution, and neighborhood redlining on children’s long-term outcomes
(Manduca and Sampson 2019, Colmer et al. 2019, Park and Quercia 2020). Other studies use the
Atlas statistics as inputs into models of residential sorting (Aliprantis et al. 2019, Davis et al. 2019)
and to understand perceptions of inequality (Ludwig and Kraus 2019). The ongoing American
Voices Project is interviewing families in neighborhoods with particularly low or high levels of
upward mobility to uncover new mechanisms from a qualitative lens. In the future, as tract-level
statistics on children’s outcomes are constructed for a longer span of years, researchers will be able
to study the effects of changes in local policies to further understand the determinants of economic
mobility, as in Baum-Snow et al. (2019).
45
